---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act I - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 18:31:14 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act1_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Viola, a Captain, and sailors_

**VIOLA**

What country, friends, is this?



**CAPTAIN**

This is Illyria, lady.



**VIOLA**

And what should I do in Illyria?
My brother, he is in Elysium.
[Perchance][1] he is not drowned. What think you, sailors?

[1]: {{page.q}}=12175 "perchance (adv.) 1:  perhaps, maybe"


**CAPTAIN**

It is [perchance][2] that you yourself were saved.

[2]: {{page.q}}=13244 "perchance (adv.) 2:  by good fortune, by chance"


**VIOLA**

O, my poor brother! and so perchance may he be.



**CAPTAIN**

True, madam, and to comfort you with [chance][3],
Assure yourself, after our ship did [split][4],
When you and those poor number saved with you
Hung on our [driving][5] boat, I saw your brother,
Most provident in peril, bind himself –
Courage and hope both teaching him the practice –
To a strong mast, that [live][6]d upon the sea;
Where, like Arion on the dolphin's back,
I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves
So long as I could see.

[3]: {{page.q}}=4501 "chance (n.) 7:  what may have happened, conceivability, possibility"
[4]: {{page.q}}=14268 "split (v.):  break up, split in two"
[5]: {{page.q}}=9183 "driving (adj.):  drifting, driven by the storm"
[6]: {{page.q}}=15349 "live (v.) 2:  stay afloat, avoid destruction"


**VIOLA**

For saying so, there's gold.
Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope,
Whereto thy speech serves for authority,
The [like][7] of him. Knowest thou this country?

[7]: {{page.q}}=21272 "like, the:  the same"


**CAPTAIN**

Ay, madam, well, for I was bred and born
Not three hours' travel from this very place.



**VIOLA**

Who governs here?



**CAPTAIN**

A noble Duke, in nature as in name.



**VIOLA**

What is his name?



**CAPTAIN**

Orsino.



**VIOLA**

Orsino . . . I have heard my father name him.
He was a bachelor then.



**CAPTAIN**

And so is now, or was so, very late;
For but a month ago I went from hence,
And then 'twas fresh in [murmur][8] – as you know,
What great ones do, the less will prattle of –
That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.

[8]: {{page.q}}=10996 "murmur (n.):  rumour, hearsay, gossip"


**VIOLA**

What's she?



**CAPTAIN**

A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count
That died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her
In the protection of his son, her brother,
Who shortly also died; for whose dear love,
They say, she hath [abjure][9]d the sight
And company of men.

[9]: {{page.q}}=662 "abjure (v.):  swear to abandon, solemnly reject"


**VIOLA**

O, that I served that lady,
And might not be [deliver][10]ed to the world –
Till I had made mine own [occasion][11] mellow –
What my [estate][13] is.

[10]: {{page.q}}=8723 "deliver (v.) 5:  present, show, display"
[11]: {{page.q}}=11600 "occasion (n.) 1:  circumstance, opportunity"
[13]: {{page.q}}=9655 "estate (n.) 1:  state, situation, circumstances"


**CAPTAIN**

That were hard to [compass][12],
Because she will [admit][14] no kind of [suit][15],
No, not the Duke's.

[12]: {{page.q}}=2920 "compass (v.) 1:  accomplish, fulfil, achieve, bring about"
[14]: {{page.q}}=6 "admit (v.) 1:  permit, allow, grant"
[15]: {{page.q}}=14962 "suit (n.) 2:  wooing, courtship"


**VIOLA**

There is a fair behaviour in thee, Captain,
And though that nature with a beauteous wall
Doth [oft][16] close in pollution, yet of thee
I will believe thou hast a mind that [suit][17]s
With this thy fair and outward [character][18].
I prithee – and I'll pay thee [bounteously][19] –
Conceal me what I am, and be my aid
For such disguise as [haply][21] shall [become][20]
The [form][22] of my [intent][23]. I'll serve this Duke.
Thou shalt present me as an eunuch to him.
It may be worth thy pains, for I can sing
And speak to him in many sorts of music
That will [allow][24] me very worth his service.
What else may [hap][25] to time I will commit.
Only shape thou thy silence to my [wit][26].

[16]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.):  often"
[17]: {{page.q}}=15697 "suit (v.) 2:  match, compare, equate"
[18]: {{page.q}}=4480 "character (n.) 8:  personal appearance, demeanour"
[19]: {{page.q}}=2603 "bounteously (adv.):  very well, liberally, generously"
[20]: {{page.q}}=1432 "become (v.) 1:  be fitting, befit, be appropriate to"
[21]: {{page.q}}=15270 "haply (adv.):  perhaps, maybe, by chance, with luck"
[22]: {{page.q}}=19871 "form (n.) 8:  physical appearance, outward appearance"
[23]: {{page.q}}=5207 "intent (n.):  intention, purpose, aim"
[24]: {{page.q}}=582 "allow (v.) 3:  acknowledge, grant, admit"
[25]: {{page.q}}=15269 "hap (v.):  happen, take place, come to pass"
[26]: {{page.q}}=8091 "wit (n.) 4:  cunning plan, ingenious design"


**CAPTAIN**

Be you his eunuch, and your [mute][27] I'll be.
When my tongue [blab][28]s, then let mine eyes not see.

[27]: {{page.q}}=5846 "mute (n.) 2:  dumb servant [as in a Turkish court]"
[28]: {{page.q}}=2524 "blab (v.) 2:  talk indiscreetly, betray secrets"


**VIOLA**

I thank thee. Lead me on.
_Exeunt_

