---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act I - Scene V
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 18:45:25 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act1_scene5.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Maria and Feste the Clown_

**MARIA**

Nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or I will
not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter, in way of
thy excuse. My lady will hang thee for thy absence.



**FESTE**

Let her hang me. He that is well hanged in this
world needs to fear no [colours][1].

[1]: {{page.q}}=3713 "colours, fear no:  fear no enemy, fear nothing"


**MARIA**

[Make][2] that good.

[2]: {{page.q}}=10500 "make good 1:  justify, vindicate, confirm"


**FESTE**

He shall see none to fear.



**MARIA**

A good [lenten][3] answer! I can tell thee where that
saying was born, of ‘ I fear no colours.’

[3]: {{page.q}}=19117 "lenten (adj.) 2:  dismal, meagre, scanty"


**FESTE**

Where, good Mistress Mary?



**MARIA**

In the wars; and that may you be bold to say in
your foolery.



**FESTE**

Well, God give them wisdom that have it; and
those that are fools, let them use their talents.



**MARIA**

Yet you will be hanged for being so long absent;
or to be [turn][4]ed away – is not that as good as a hanging
to you?

[4]: {{page.q}}=5733 "turn away (v.):  send away, dismiss from service"


**FESTE**

Many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage;
and for turning away, let summer [bear][5] it out.

[5]: {{page.q}}=1504 "bear out (v.) 1:  endure, weather, cope [with]"


**MARIA**

You are resolute, then?



**FESTE**

Not so neither, but I am resolved on two [point][6]s.

[6]: {{page.q}}=13081 "point (n.) 2:  (usually plural) tagged lace [especially for attaching hose to the doublet]"


**MARIA**

That if one break, the other will hold; or if both
break, your [gaskins][7] fall.

[7]: {{page.q}}=17950 "gaskins (n.):  loose-fitting trousers, wide breeches"


**FESTE**

Apt, in good faith, very apt. Well, go thy way, if
Sir Toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a
piece of Eve's flesh as any in Illyria.



**MARIA**

Peace, you rogue, no more o' that. Here comes my
lady. Make your excuse wisely, you were [best][8].
_Exit_
_Enter Olivia with Malvolio and attendants_

[8]: {{page.q}}=1595 "best, thou wert / you were:  you are best advised"


**FESTE**

Wit, an't be thy will, put me into good fooling.
Those [wit][10]s that think they have thee do very [oft][9] prove
fools; and I that am sure I lack thee may pass for a wise
man. For what says Quinapalus? ‘ Better a [witty][11] fool
than a foolish [wit][12].’ God bless thee, lady!

[9]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.):  often"
[10]: {{page.q}}=8225 "wit (n.) 6:  lively person, sharp-minded individual"
[11]: {{page.q}}=7772 "witty (adj.) 2:  intelligent, ingenious, sensible"
[12]: {{page.q}}=8225 "wit (n.) 6:  lively person, sharp-minded individual"


**OLIVIA**

Take the fool away.



**FESTE**

Do you not hear, fellows? Take away the lady.



**OLIVIA**

Go to, y' are a [dry][13] fool. I'll no more of you. Besides,
you grow [dishonest][14].

[13]: {{page.q}}=9185 "dry (adj.) 1:  barren, arid, yielding no result"
[14]: {{page.q}}=9186 "dishonest (adj.) 1:  undutiful, unreliable, irresponsible"


**FESTE**

Two faults, madonna, that drink and good counsel
will amend. For give the dry fool drink, then is the fool
not dry. Bid the dishonest man mend himself: if he
mend, he is no longer dishonest; if he cannot, let the
[botcher][15] mend him. Anything that's mended, is but
patched: virtue that transgresses is but patched with
sin; and sin that [amend][16]s is but patched with virtue. If
that this simple syllogism will serve, so; if it will not,
what remedy? As there is no true [cuckold][18] but calamity,
so beauty's a flower. The lady [bade][17] take away the fool;
therefore I say again – take her away!

[15]: {{page.q}}=1942 "botcher (n.):  mender of old clothes, tailor who does repairs, patcher-up"
[16]: {{page.q}}=424 "amend (v.) 3:  make better, ameliorate, lessen the evil of"
[17]: {{page.q}}=2049 "bid (v.), past form bade 1:  command, order, enjoin, tell"
[18]: {{page.q}}=2786 "cuckold (n.):  [mocking name] man with an unfaithful wife"


**OLIVIA**

Sir, I bade them take away you.



**FESTE**

_cucullus_
_non facit monachum_
[motley][20] in my brain. Good [madonna][19], give me leave to
prove you a fool.

[19]: {{page.q}}=10997 "madonna (n.):  my lady, madam"
[20]: {{page.q}}=10554 "motley (n.) 1:  distinctive dress of a fool"


**OLIVIA**

Can you do it?



**FESTE**

[Dexteriously][21], good madonna.

[21]: {{page.q}}=9187 "dexteriously (adv.):  with dexterity, adroitly, skilfully"


**OLIVIA**

Make your proof.



**FESTE**

I must [catechize][22] you for it, madonna. Good my
mouse of virtue, answer me.

[22]: {{page.q}}=4205 "catechize (v.) 2:  question systematically, cross-examine, interrogate"


**OLIVIA**

Well, sir, for [want][25] of other [idleness][24], I'll [bide][23] your
proof.

[23]: {{page.q}}=1920 "bide (v.) 2:  face, await, undergo"
[24]: {{page.q}}=5195 "idleness (n.):  pastime, foolishness, silly diversion"
[25]: {{page.q}}=7663 "want (n.) 1:  lack, shortage, dearth"


**FESTE**

Good madonna, why mourn'st thou?



**OLIVIA**

Good fool, for my brother's death.



**FESTE**

I think his soul is in hell, madonna.



**OLIVIA**

I know his soul is in heaven, fool.



**FESTE**

The more fool, madonna, to mourn for your
brother's soul, being in heaven. Take away the fool,
gentlemen.



**OLIVIA**

What think you of this fool, Malvolio? Doth he
not [mend][26]?

[26]: {{page.q}}=11030 "mend (v.) 1:  amend, improve, make better, put right"


**MALVOLIO**

Yes, and shall do, till the pangs of death shake
him. Infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make the
better fool.



**FESTE**

God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity for the better
increasing your folly. Sir Toby will be sworn that I am
no fox, but he will not pass his word for twopence that
you are no fool.



**OLIVIA**

How say you to that, Malvolio?



**MALVOLIO**

I marvel your ladyship takes delight in such a
[barren][27] rascal. I saw him [put][28] down the other day with an
ordinary fool that has no more brain than a stone. Look
you now, he's out of his guard already; unless you laugh
and [minister][29] [occasion][30] to him, he is gagged. I protest I
take these wise men, that crow so at these [set][31] kind of
fools, no better than the fools' [zanies][32].

[27]: {{page.q}}=1584 "barren (adj.) 2:  stupid, empty-headed, dull"
[28]: {{page.q}}=13246 "put down (v.):  crush, defeat, put to silence"
[29]: {{page.q}}=10856 "minister (v.) 1:  provide, supply, give"
[30]: {{page.q}}=11600 "occasion (n.) 1:  circumstance, opportunity"
[31]: {{page.q}}=14223 "set (adj.) 3:  carefully composed, deliberately expressed"
[32]: {{page.q}}=8331 "zany (n.):  stooge, clown's assistant, mimic"


**OLIVIA**

O, you are sick of self-love, Malvolio, and taste
with a [distempered][33] appetite. To be generous, guiltless,
and of [free][35] disposition, is to take those things for [bird-bolt][34]s
that you deem cannon bullets. There is no slander
in an [allowed][36] fool, though he do nothing but [rail][37]; nor no
[railing][38] in a known discreet man, though he do nothing
but reprove.

[33]: {{page.q}}=9188 "distempered (adj.) 3:  disordered, disturbed, diseased"
[34]: {{page.q}}=2281 "bird-bolt, burbolt (n.):  short blunt-headed arrow for shooting birds"
[35]: {{page.q}}=20339 "free (adj.) 2:  generous, magnanimous"
[36]: {{page.q}}=583 "allowed (adj.) 2:  licensed, authorized, permitted"
[37]: {{page.q}}=17089 "rail (v.):  rant, rave, be abusive [about]"
[38]: {{page.q}}=16560 "railing (n.):  abuse, insulting speech, vilification"


**FESTE**

Now Mercury [endue][39] thee with [leasing][40], for thou
speak'st well of fools.
_Enter Maria_

[39]: {{page.q}}=4972 "indue, endue (v.) 1:  endow, furnish, provide"
[40]: {{page.q}}=15350 "leasing (n.) 2:  skill in lying, ability to lie"


**MARIA**

Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman
much desires to speak with you.



**OLIVIA**

From the Count Orsino, is it?



**MARIA**

I know not, madam. 'Tis a fair young man, and
well [attend][41]ed.

[41]: {{page.q}}=913 "attend (v.) 2:  serve, follow, wait [on/upon]"


**OLIVIA**

Who of my people hold him in delay?



**MARIA**

Sir Toby, madam, your kinsman.



**OLIVIA**

Fetch him off, I pray you, he speaks nothing but
madman. Fie on him! Go you, Malvolio. If it be a [suit][42]
from the Count, I am sick or not at home – what you
will, to dismiss it.
_Exit Malvolio_
Now you see, sir, how your fooling grows [old][43] and people
dislike it?

[42]: {{page.q}}=14102 "suit (n.) 1:  formal request, entreaty, petition"
[43]: {{page.q}}=11869 "old (adj.) 2:  hackneyed, worn-out, stale"


**FESTE**

Thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest
son should be a fool; whose skull Jove cram with brains,
for – here he comes –
_Enter Sir Toby_
_pia mater_



**OLIVIA**

By mine honour, half drunk! What is he at the
gate, cousin?



**SIR TOBY**

A gentleman.



**OLIVIA**

A gentleman! What gentleman?



**SIR TOBY**

'Tis a gentleman here – a plague o' these
pickle-herring! (To Feste) How now, sot!



**FESTE**

Good Sir Toby!



**OLIVIA**

Cousin, cousin, how have you come so early by
this lethargy?



**SIR TOBY**

Lechery! I defy lechery! There's one at the
gate.



**OLIVIA**

Ay, marry, what is he?



**SIR TOBY**

Let him be the devil an he will, I care not. Give
me faith, say I. Well, it's [all][44] one.
_Exit Sir Toby, followed by Maria_

[44]: {{page.q}}=104 "all is one; that's / it's all one:  it makes no difference, it's one and the same, it doesn't matter"


**OLIVIA**

What's a drunken man like, fool?



**FESTE**

Like a drowned man, a fool, and a madman. One
draught above [heat][45] makes him a fool, the second mads
him, and a third drowns him.

[45]: {{page.q}}=18615 "heat (n.) 4:  normal body temperature"


**OLIVIA**

Go thou and seek the [crowner][46], and let him sit o'
my coz, for he's in the third [degree][47] of drink – he's
drowned. Go, look after him.

[46]: {{page.q}}=2782 "crowner (n.):  coroner"
[47]: {{page.q}}=8701 "degree (n.) 3:  step, stage, rung"


**FESTE**

He is but mad yet, madonna, and the fool shall look
to the madman.
_Exit_
_Enter Malvolio_



**MALVOLIO**

Madam, yond young fellow swears he will
speak with you. I told him you were sick; he takes on
him to understand so much, and therefore comes to
speak with you. I told him you were asleep; he seems to
have a foreknowledge of that too, and therefore comes
to speak with you. What is to be said to him, lady? He's
fortified against any denial.



**OLIVIA**

Tell him, he shall not speak with me.



**MALVOLIO**

He's been told so; and he says he'll stand at
your door like a sheriff's [post][48] and be the supporter to a
bench, but he'll speak with you.

[48]: {{page.q}}=12530 "post (n.) 3:  door-post"


**OLIVIA**

What kind o' man is he?



**MALVOLIO**

Why, of mankind.



**OLIVIA**

What manner of man?



**MALVOLIO**

Of very [ill][49] manner; he'll speak with you, will
you or no.

[49]: {{page.q}}=4918 "ill (adj.) 1:  bad, adverse, unfavourable"


**OLIVIA**

Of what [personage][50] and years is he?

[50]: {{page.q}}=13249 "personage (n.):  appearance, demeanour"


**MALVOLIO**

Not yet old enough for a man, nor young
enough for a boy; as a [squash][52] is before 'tis a [peascod][51], or
a [codling][53] when 'tis almost an apple. 'Tis with him in
[standing][54] water between boy and man. He is very [well-favoured][55],
and he speaks very [shrewishly][56]. One would
think his mother's milk were scarce out of him.

[51]: {{page.q}}=12313 "peascod (n.):  pea-plant, pea-pod"
[52]: {{page.q}}=15660 "squash (n.) 1:  unripe pea-pod"
[53]: {{page.q}}=3554 "codling (n.):  unripe apple, half-grown apple"
[54]: {{page.q}}=15661 "standing (adj.) 3:  not ebbing or flowing"
[55]: {{page.q}}=7824 "well-favoured (adj.):  good-looking, attractive in appearance"
[56]: {{page.q}}=15662 "shrewishly (adv.):  like a woman, shrilly, sharply"


**OLIVIA**

Let him approach. Call in my gentlewoman.



**MALVOLIO**

Gentlewoman, my lady calls.
_Exit_
_Enter Maria_



**OLIVIA**

Give me my veil. Come, throw it o'er my face.
We'll once more hear Orsino's [embassy][57].
_Enter Viola_

[57]: {{page.q}}=9897 "embassy (n.) 1:  message [especially via an ambassador]"


**VIOLA**

The honourable lady of the house, which is she?



**OLIVIA**

Speak to me, I shall answer for her. Your will?



**VIOLA**

Most radiant, exquisite, and unmatchable beauty –
I pray you, tell me if this be the lady of the house, for I
never saw her. I would be loath to cast away my speech;
for besides that it is excellently well penned, I have
taken great pains to [con][58] it. Good beauties, let me sustain
no scorn. I am very [comptible][59], even to the least [sinister][60]
[usage][61].

[58]: {{page.q}}=2691 "con (v.) 1:  learn by heart, commit to memory"
[59]: {{page.q}}=3555 "comptible (adj.):  sensitive, thin-skinned, impressionable"
[60]: {{page.q}}=15837 "sinister (adj.) 3:  malicious, adverse, impolite"
[61]: {{page.q}}=7140 "usage (n.):  treatment, handling, conduct"


**OLIVIA**

Whence came you, sir?



**VIOLA**

I can say little more than I have [studied][62], and that
question's out of my part. Good [gentle][64] one, give me
[modest][65] [assurance][63] if you be the lady of the house, that I
may proceed in my speech.

[62]: {{page.q}}=14094 "study (v.) 3:  learn by heart, commit to memory"
[63]: {{page.q}}=71 "assurance (n.) 2:  confirmation, pledge, guarantee"
[64]: {{page.q}}=17495 "gentle (adj.) 1:  well-born, honourable, noble"
[65]: {{page.q}}=11034 "modest (adj.) 1:  moderate, reasonable, mild, limited"


**OLIVIA**

Are you a [comedian][66]?

[66]: {{page.q}}=3556 "comedian (n.):  actor, stage-player"


**VIOLA**

No, my profound heart; and yet, by the very fangs
of malice, I swear I am not that I play. Are you the lady
of the house?



**OLIVIA**

If I do not [usurp][67] myself, I am.

[67]: {{page.q}}=6993 "usurp (v.) 1:  supplant, oust, impersonate"


**VIOLA**

Most certain, if you are she, you do [usurp][68] yourself;
for what is yours to bestow is not yours to reserve.
But this is from my [commission][69]. I will on with my
speech in your praise, and then show you the heart of
my message.

[68]: {{page.q}}=6883 "usurp (v.) 3:  take wrongful possession of, misappropriate"
[69]: {{page.q}}=2675 "commission (n.) 1:  warrant, authority [to act]"


**OLIVIA**

Come to what is important in't. I [forgive][70] you the
praise.

[70]: {{page.q}}=20569 "forgive (v.):  excuse, let off"


**VIOLA**

Alas, I took great pains to study it, and 'tis poetical.



**OLIVIA**

It is the more [like][71] to be feigned; I pray you, keep it
in. I heard you were [saucy][72] at my gates, and allowed your
approach rather to [wonder][73] at you than to hear you. If
you be not mad, be gone; if you have reason, be brief.
'Tis not that time of moon with me, to make one in so
[skipping][74] a dialogue.

[71]: {{page.q}}=19137 "like (adv.) 1:  likely, probable / probably"
[72]: {{page.q}}=14344 "saucy (adj.) 1:  insolent, impudent, presumptuous, defiant"
[73]: {{page.q}}=8093 "wonder (v.) 2:  stare in curiosity, look in fascination"
[74]: {{page.q}}=14553 "skipping (adj.) 1:  frivolous, flighty, frolicsome"


**MARIA**

_showing Viola the way out_
Will you hoist sail, sir?
Here lies your way.



**VIOLA**

No, good [swabber][76], I am to [hull][75] here a little longer.
Some [mollification][77] for your giant, sweet lady! Tell me
your mind; I am a messenger.

[75]: {{page.q}}=18578 "hull (v.):  lie, float, drift [with sails furled]"
[76]: {{page.q}}=15015 "swabber (n.):  deckhand, sailor who washes the deck"
[77]: {{page.q}}=11000 "mollification (n.):  appeasement, placating, pacifying"


**OLIVIA**

Sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver,
when the [courtesy][78] of it is so [fearful][79]. Speak your [office][80].

[78]: {{page.q}}=3637 "courtesy, cur'sy, curtsy (n.) 3:  salutation, first greeting, expression of courtesy"
[79]: {{page.q}}=19996 "fearful (adj.) 2:  causing fear, awe-inspiring, terrifying, alarming"
[80]: {{page.q}}=11936 "office (n.) 1:  task, service, duty, responsibility"


**VIOLA**

It alone concerns your ear. I bring no [overture][81] of
war, no [taxation][84] of [homage][82]. I hold the [olive][83] in my hand;
my words are as full of peace as [matter][85].

[81]: {{page.q}}=11800 "overture (n.) 1:  disclosure, revelation"
[82]: {{page.q}}=18616 "homage (n.) 1:  act of homage, acknowledgement of allegiance"
[83]: {{page.q}}=11952 "olive (n.):  olive-branch [symbol of peace]"
[84]: {{page.q}}=6279 "taxation (n.) 2:  demand for money, financial claim"
[85]: {{page.q}}=10513 "matter (n.) 4:  affair(s), business, real issue"


**OLIVIA**

Yet you began rudely. What are you? What
would you?



**VIOLA**

The rudeness that hath appeared in me have I
learned from my [entertainment][86]. What I am and what I
would are as secret as maidenhead; to your ears divinity,
to any others profanation.

[86]: {{page.q}}=9764 "entertainment (n.) 1:  treatment, hospitality, reception"


**OLIVIA**

Give us the place alone.
_Maria and attendants withdraw_
We will hear this divinity. Now, sir, what is your text?



**VIOLA**

Most sweet lady –



**OLIVIA**

A [comfortable][87] doctrine, and much may be said of
it. Where lies your text?

[87]: {{page.q}}=3615 "comfortable (adj.) 2:  comforting, encouraging, reassuring"


**VIOLA**

In Orsino's [bosom][88].

[88]: {{page.q}}=2300 "bosom (n.) 1:  heart, inner person"


**OLIVIA**

In his bosom! In what chapter of his bosom?



**VIOLA**

To answer by the [method][89], in the first of his heart.

[89]: {{page.q}}=11001 "method (n.) 2:  table of contents, summary arrangement"


**OLIVIA**

O, I have read it; it is heresy. Have you no more to
say?



**VIOLA**

Good madam, let me see your face.



**OLIVIA**

Have you any [commission][90] from your lord to negotiate
with my face? You are now out of your [text][91]; but
we will draw the curtain and show you the picture. Look
you, sir, such a one I was this [present][92]. Is't not well
done?

[90]: {{page.q}}=2675 "commission (n.) 1:  warrant, authority [to act]"
[91]: {{page.q}}=6354 "text (n.) 1:  theme, subject, topic"
[92]: {{page.q}}=13250 "present, this:  just now, recently"


**VIOLA**

Excellently done – if God did all.



**OLIVIA**

'Tis in [grain][93], sir, 'twill endure wind and weather.

[93]: {{page.q}}=17660 "grain, in:  inherent, ingrained, indelible"


**VIOLA**

'Tis beauty truly [blent][94], whose red and white
Nature's own sweet and [cunning][95] hand laid on.
Lady, you are the cruellest [she][96] alive,
If you will lead these graces to the grave,
And leave the world no copy.

[94]: {{page.q}}=2273 "blent (adj.):  blended, mixed, applied [as of painting]"
[95]: {{page.q}}=2789 "cunning (adj.) 1:  knowledgeable, skilful, clever"
[96]: {{page.q}}=14885 "she (n.):  lady, woman, girl"


**OLIVIA**

O, sir, I will not be so hard-hearted. I will give
out [divers][97] [schedule][98]s of my beauty. It shall be inventoried,
and every particle and [utensil][100] [label][99]led to my will.
As, item: two lips, [indifferent][101] red; item: two grey eyes,
with lids to them; item: one neck, one chin, and so forth.
Were you sent hither to [praise][102] me?

[97]: {{page.q}}=9213 "divers (adj.):  different, various, several"
[98]: {{page.q}}=15663 "schedule (n.) 1:  inventory, list, itemization"
[99]: {{page.q}}=15351 "label (v.):  attach as a codicil, affix as a supplementary note"
[100]: {{page.q}}=6994 "utensil (n.) 1:  distinctive feature, functional organ"
[101]: {{page.q}}=4855 "indifferent (adv.) 1:  moderately, tolerably, reasonably"
[102]: {{page.q}}=13251 "praise (v.) 2:  appraise, assess, put a valuation on"


**VIOLA**

I see you what you are, you are too proud.
But if you were the devil, you are fair.
My lord and master loves you – O, such love
Could be but recompensed, though you were crowned
The [nonpareil][103] of beauty!

[103]: {{page.q}}=11411 "nonpareil (n.):  person without equal, unique one, paragon"


**OLIVIA**

How does he love me?



**VIOLA**

With adorations, [fertile][104] tears,
With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.

[104]: {{page.q}}=20256 "fertile (adj.):  abundant, profuse, rich"


**OLIVIA**

Your lord does know my mind, I cannot love him.
Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
Of great [estate][105], of fresh and stainless youth,
In [voice][108]s well [divulge][106]d, [free][107], learned, and valiant,
And in [dimension][109] and the [shape][111] of nature
A [gracious][110] person. But yet I cannot love him.
He might have took his answer long ago.

[105]: {{page.q}}=9654 "estate (n.) 2:  high rank, standing, status"
[106]: {{page.q}}=8828 "divulge (v.) 1:  proclaim, reveal, make publicly known"
[107]: {{page.q}}=19925 "free (adj.) 3:  noble, honourable, worthy"
[108]: {{page.q}}=7518 "voice (n.) 4:  talk, rumour, opinion"
[109]: {{page.q}}=9246 "dimension (n.) 1:  bodily form, physical frame"
[110]: {{page.q}}=17951 "gracious (adj.) 10:  graceful, elegant, attractive"
[111]: {{page.q}}=15733 "shape (n.) 1:  appearance, aspect, visible form"


**VIOLA**

If I did love you in my master's flame,
With such a suffering, such a [deadly][112] life,
In your denial I would find no sense;
I would not understand it.

[112]: {{page.q}}=9252 "deadly (adj.):  deathly, death-like"


**OLIVIA**

Why, what would you?



**VIOLA**

Make me a [willow][114] [cabin][113] at your gate,
And call upon my soul within the house;
Write loyal [canton][115]s of [contemned][116] love
And sing them loud even in the dead of night;
[Hallow][117] your name to the [reverberate][118] hills
And make the babbling gossip of the air
Cry out ‘ Olivia!’ O, you should not rest
Between the elements of air and earth,
But you should pity me.

[113]: {{page.q}}=4619 "cabin (n.) 1:  small room, hut, shelter"
[114]: {{page.q}}=8004 "willow (adj.):  made of leaves from the willow tree [a symbol of the grief felt by a deserted or unrequited lover]"
[115]: {{page.q}}=4042 "canton (n.):  song, ballad, verse"
[116]: {{page.q}}=3557 "contemned (adj.) 2:  despised, rejected, spurned"
[117]: {{page.q}}=18222 "hallow, holloa, hollow (v.) 1:  shout, yell, cry out"
[118]: {{page.q}}=17201 "reverberate (adj.):  reverberating, resounding, echoing"


**OLIVIA**

You might do much.
What is your parentage?



**VIOLA**

Above my fortunes, yet my [state][119] is well.
I am a gentleman.

[119]: {{page.q}}=13887 "state (n.) 2:  status, rank, position"


**OLIVIA**

Get you to your lord.
I cannot love him. Let him send no more –
Unless, [perchance][120], you come to me again
To tell me how he takes it. [Fare][121] you well.
I thank you for your pains. Spend this for me.

[120]: {{page.q}}=12175 "perchance (adv.) 1:  perhaps, maybe"
[121]: {{page.q}}=20910 "fare ... well: "


**VIOLA**

I am no [fee'd][122] [post][123], lady; keep your purse.
My master, not myself, lacks recompense.
Love make his heart of flint, that you shall love,
And let your fervour like my master's be
Placed in contempt. Farewell, fair cruelty!
_Exit_

[122]: {{page.q}}=20325 "fee'd (adj.):  paid by a fee, hired, bribed"
[123]: {{page.q}}=12610 "post (n.) 1:  express messenger, courier"


**OLIVIA**

‘ What is your parentage?’
‘ Above my fortunes, yet my state is well.
I am a gentleman.’ I'll be sworn thou art.
Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit
Do give thee fivefold [blazon][124]. Not too fast! soft, soft –
Unless the master were the man. How now?
Even so quickly may one catch the plague?
[Methinks][125] I feel this youth's perfections,
With an invisible and [subtle][127] [stealth][126],
To creep in at mine eyes. Well, let it be!
What ho, Malvolio!
_Enter Malvolio_

[124]: {{page.q}}=2037 "blazon (n.) 1:  armorial bearing, banner showing a coat-of-arms"
[125]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[126]: {{page.q}}=14636 "stealth (n.) 1:  stealing away, furtive journey, clandestine act"
[127]: {{page.q}}=15065 "subtle, subtile (adj.) 1:  crafty, cunning, wily"


**MALVOLIO**

Here, madam, at your service.



**OLIVIA**

Run after that same [peevish][128] messenger,
The [County][129]'s man. He left this ring behind him,
Would I or not. Tell him, I'll none of it.
Desire him not to [flatter][130] with his lord,
Nor hold him up with hopes; I am not for him.
If that the youth will come this way tomorrow,
I'll give him reasons for't. [Hie][131] thee, Malvolio!

[128]: {{page.q}}=12403 "peevish (adj.) 1:  silly, foolish; or: headstrong, impulsive"
[129]: {{page.q}}=3568 "county (n.) 1:  [title of rank] count"
[130]: {{page.q}}=20026 "flatter with / withal (v.) 1:  encourage, foster [false] hope"
[131]: {{page.q}}=18172 "hie (v.):  hasten, hurry, speed"


**MALVOLIO**

Madam, I will.
_Exit_



**OLIVIA**

I do I know not what, and fear to find
Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind.
Fate, show thy force; ourselves we do not [owe][132].
What is decreed must be, and be this so.
_Exit_

[132]: {{page.q}}=11935 "owe (v.) 1:  own, possess, have"
