---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act I - Scene IV
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 18:40:22 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act1_scene4.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Valentine, and Viola in man's attire_

**VALENTINE**

If the Duke continue these favours towards
you, Cesario, you are [like][1] to be much advanced. He hath
known you but three days, and already you are no
stranger.

[1]: {{page.q}}=19137 "like (adv.) 1:  likely, probable / probably"


**VIOLA**

You either fear his [humour][3] or my negligence, that
you call in question the [continuance][4] of his love. Is he
inconstant, sir, in his favours?

[2]: {{page.q}}=18215 "humour (n.) 2:  fancy, whim, inclination, caprice"
[3]: {{page.q}}=18247 "humour (n.) 1:  mood, disposition, frame of mind, temperament [as determined by bodily fluids]"
[4]: {{page.q}}=3743 "continuance (n.) 3:  lasting nature, permanence, durability"


**VALENTINE**

No, believe me.
_Enter Orsino, Curio, and attendants_



**VIOLA**

I thank you. Here comes the Count.



**ORSINO**

Who saw Cesario, ho?



**VIOLA**

On your attendance, my lord, here.



**ORSINO**

_to Curio and attendants_
Stand you awhile aloof. (To Viola) Cesario,
Thou knowest no less but all. I have [unclasp][5]ed
To thee the book even of my secret soul.
Therefore, good youth, [address][6] thy [gait][7] unto her.
Be not denied access; stand at her doors,
And tell them, there thy fixed foot shall grow
Till thou have audience.

[5]: {{page.q}}=6902 "unclasp (v.):  reveal, display, divulge"
[6]: {{page.q}}=294 "address (v.) 3:  direct, apply, turn"
[7]: {{page.q}}=17478 "gait (n.) 2:  proceedings, course, doings, steps"


**VIOLA**

Sure, my noble lord,
If she be so abandoned to her sorrow
As it is spoke, she never will admit me.



**ORSINO**

Be clamorous and leap all [civil][9] [bound][8]s
Rather than make unprofited return.

[8]: {{page.q}}=1850 "bound (n.) 1:  limit, boundary, confine, barrier"
[9]: {{page.q}}=2642 "civil (adj.) 1:  civilized, cultured, refined"


**VIOLA**

Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?



**ORSINO**

O, then unfold the passion of my love.
[Surprise][11] her with [discourse][10] of my dear faith.
It shall [become][12] thee well to act my woes;
She will [attend][14] it better in thy youth
Than in a [nuncio][16]'s of more grave [aspect][15].

[10]: {{page.q}}=8673 "discourse (n.) 1:  conversation, talk, chat"
[11]: {{page.q}}=15176 "surprise (v.) 2:  take prisoner, capture [especially: suddenly, unexpectedly]"
[12]: {{page.q}}=1432 "become (v.) 1:  be fitting, befit, be appropriate to"
[13]: {{page.q}}=77 "attend (v.) 7:  listen [to], pay attention [to]"
[14]: {{page.q}}=324 "attend (v.) 6:  regard, consider"
[15]: {{page.q}}=60 "aspect (n.) 1:  [of a human face] look, appearance, expression"
[16]: {{page.q}}=11483 "nuncio (n.):  messenger, emissary"


**VIOLA**

I think not so, my lord.



**ORSINO**

Dear lad, believe it.
For they shall yet [belie][17] thy happy years
That say thou art a man. Diana's lip
Is not more smooth and [rubious][19]. Thy small [pipe][18]
Is as the maiden's organ, shrill and [sound][20],
And all is [semblative][22] a woman's [part][21].
I know thy [constellation][24] is right [apt][23]
For this affair. Some four or five [attend][25] him –
All, if you will; for I myself am best
When least in company. Prosper well in this,
And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord,
To call his fortunes thine.

[17]: {{page.q}}=1563 "belie (v.) 1:  slander, tell lies about"
[18]: {{page.q}}=13247 "pipe (n.):  voice"
[19]: {{page.q}}=17200 "rubious (adj.):  ruby-coloured, deep red"
[20]: {{page.q}}=15658 "sound (adj.) 4:  unbroken"
[21]: {{page.q}}=12150 "part (n.) 1:  quality, attribute, gift, accomplishment [of mind or body]"
[22]: {{page.q}}=15659 "semblative (adj.):  resembling, looking like"
[23]: {{page.q}}=43 "apt (adj.) 1:  fit, ready, prepared"
[24]: {{page.q}}=3553 "constellation:  [the stars were thought to influence people and events] disposition, character, temperament"
[25]: {{page.q}}=913 "attend (v.) 2:  serve, follow, wait [on/upon]"


**VIOLA**

I'll do my best
To woo your lady. (Aside) Yet, a [barful][26] strife!
Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife.
_Exeunt_

[26]: {{page.q}}=1697 "barful (adj.):  full of hindrances, with impediments"
