---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act II - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 20:38:43 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act2_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Viola and Malvolio at several doors_

**MALVOLIO**

Were not you even now with the Countess
Olivia?



**VIOLA**

Even now, sir; on a moderate pace I have since
arrived but hither.



**MALVOLIO**

She returns this ring to you, sir. You might
have saved me my pains, to have taken it away yourself.
She adds, moreover, that you should put your lord into
a [desperate][2] [assurance][1] she will none of him; and one
thing more, that you be never so [hardy][3] to come again in
his affairs – unless it be to report your lord's taking of
this. Receive it so.

[1]: {{page.q}}=72 "assurance (n.) 1:  security, certainty, confidence"
[2]: {{page.q}}=8398 "desperate (adj.) 1:  despairing, hopeless, without hope"
[3]: {{page.q}}=18217 "hardy (adj.):  bold, daring, forward"


**VIOLA**

She took the ring of me, I'll none of it.



**MALVOLIO**

Come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her, and
her will is it should be so returned. If it be worth stooping
for, there it lies in your [eye][4]; if not, be it his that finds
it.
_Exit_

[4]: {{page.q}}=9930 "eye (n.) 1:  sight, view, presence"


**VIOLA**

I left no ring with her; what means this lady?
Fortune forbid my [outside][6] have not [charm][5]ed her!
She made good [view][7] of me, indeed so much
That – [methought][9] – her eyes had [lost][8] her tongue,
For she did speak in [starts][11], [distractedly][10].
She loves me, sure, the [cunning][12] of her passion
Invites me in this churlish messenger.
None of my lord's ring? Why, he sent her none.
I am the man! If it be so – as 'tis –
Poor lady, she were better love a dream.
Disguise, I see thou art a wickedness
Wherein the [pregnant][13] enemy does much.
How easy is it for the [proper][15] [false][14]
In women's waxen hearts to set their [form][16]s.
Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we,
For such as we are made, if such we be.
How will this [fadge][17]? My master loves her dearly;
And I, poor monster, [fond][18] as much on him;
And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me.
What will become of this? As I am man,
My state is desperate for my master's love.
As I am woman – now, alas the day,
What [thriftless][19] sighs shall poor Olivia breathe!
O time, thou must untangle this, not I!
It is too hard a knot for me t' untie.
_Exit_

[5]: {{page.q}}=4293 "charm (v.) 1:  work magic [on], bewitch, enchant"
[6]: {{page.q}}=11662 "outside (n.) 1:  appearance, look, outside show"
[7]: {{page.q}}=7416 "view (n.) 2:  inspection, examination"
[8]: {{page.q}}=19342 "lose (v.) 3:  lose sight of, forget"
[9]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[10]: {{page.q}}=9578 "distractedly (adv.):  disjointedly, erratically, with agitation"
[11]: {{page.q}}=16500 "starts, by / in:  in fits and starts"
[12]: {{page.q}}=2840 "cunning (n.) 3:  deviousness, deceit, craftiness, artfulness"
[13]: {{page.q}}=13253 "pregnant (adj.) 6:  resourceful, wily"
[14]: {{page.q}}=20570 "false (n.):  false person, deceiver"
[15]: {{page.q}}=12275 "proper (adj.) 1:  good-looking, handsome, comely"
[16]: {{page.q}}=19868 "form (n.) 2:  imprinted shape, impressed image"
[17]: {{page.q}}=20571 "fadge (v.) 2:  turn out, end up, come off"
[18]: {{page.q}}=20572 "fond (v.):  dote, be infatuated"
[19]: {{page.q}}=6280 "thriftless (adj.):  useless, worthless, unprofitable"
