---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act II - Scene III
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 20:45:11 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act2_scene3.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Sir Toby and Sir Andrew_

**SIR TOBY**

Approach, Sir Andrew. Not to be abed after
_diluculo surgere_
thou knowest –



**SIR ANDREW**

Nay, by my troth, I know not; but I know
to be up late is to be up late.



**SIR TOBY**

A [false][1] conclusion! I hate it as an unfilled can.
To be up after midnight and to go to bed then is early;
so that to go to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes.
Does not our lives consist of the four [element][2]s?

[1]: {{page.q}}=20466 "false (adj.) 4:  wrong, mistaken"
[2]: {{page.q}}=9975 "element (n.) 1:  (plural) substances from which all material things are made [believed to be earth, water, air, fire]"


**SIR ANDREW**

Faith, so they say; but I think it rather consists
of eating and drinking.



**SIR TOBY**

Thou'rt a scholar. Let us therefore eat and
drink. Marian, I say! A [stoup][3] of wine!
_Enter Feste_

[3]: {{page.q}}=14085 "stoup (n.):  cup, flagon, jug, tankard"


**SIR ANDREW**

Here comes the fool, i'faith.



**FESTE**

How now, my hearts! Did you never see the picture
of We Three?



**SIR TOBY**

Welcome, ass! Now let's have a [catch][4].

[4]: {{page.q}}=4196 "catch (n.):  musical round"


**SIR ANDREW**

By my troth, the fool has an excellent [breast][5].
I had rather than forty shillings I had such a [leg][6], and so
sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has. In sooth, thou
wast in very [gracious][7] fooling last night, when thou
spok'st of Pigrogromitus, of the Vapians passing the
[equinoctial][8] of Queubus. 'Twas very good, i'faith. I sent
thee sixpence for thy [leman][9], hadst it?

[5]: {{page.q}}=2275 "breast (n.) 1:  singing voice, pair of lungs"
[6]: {{page.q}}=19277 "leg (n.) 1:  bending of a knee, genuflection, obeisance"
[7]: {{page.q}}=17952 "gracious (adj.) 8:  pleasing, agreeable, inspired"
[8]: {{page.q}}=10114 "equinoctial (n.):  [mock-astronomy] equator [celestial or terrestrial]"
[9]: {{page.q}}=19329 "leman (n.):  lover, paramour, sweetheart"


**FESTE**

I did [impetticoat][11] thy [gratillity][10]; for Malvolio's nose
is no [whipstock][12], my lady has a white hand, and the
Myrmidons are no [bottle-ale][13] houses.

[10]: {{page.q}}=17953 "gratillity (n.):  humorous version of ‘gratuity’"
[11]: {{page.q}}=5196 "impetticoat, impeticos (v.):  pocket up"
[12]: {{page.q}}=7611 "whipstock (n.):  whip-handle"
[13]: {{page.q}}=2600 "bottle-ale (adj.):  dissolute, degenerate, low"


**SIR ANDREW**

Excellent! Why, this is the best fooling,
when all is done. Now, a song!



**SIR TOBY**

Come on, there is sixpence for you. Let's have a
song.



**SIR ANDREW**

There's a [testril][14] of me, too. If one knight
give a –

[14]: {{page.q}}=5735 "tester, testril (n.):  sixpenny piece"


**FESTE**

Would you have a love [song][15], or a song of good life?

[15]: {{page.q}}=15664 "song of good life:  drinking song"


**SIR TOBY**

A love song! A love song!



**SIR ANDREW**

Ay, ay, I care not for good life.



**FESTE**

_sings_
O mistress mine! Where are you roaming?
O, stay and hear: your true love's coming,
That can sing both high and low.
Trip no further, pretty [sweeting][16];
Journeys end in lovers meeting,
Every wise man's son doth know.

[16]: {{page.q}}=15112 "sweeting (n.) 1:  sweetheart, darling, dearest"


**SIR ANDREW**

Excellent good, i'faith.



**SIR TOBY**

Good, good.



**FESTE**

_sings_
What is love? 'Tis not hereafter;
Present mirth hath present laughter,
What's to come is [still][17] unsure.
In delay there lies no plenty –
Then come kiss me, sweet and [twenty][18],
Youth's a stuff will not endure.

[17]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"
[18]: {{page.q}}=5560 "twenty, and:  [ballad catch phrase, used as an intensifer] and many more"


**SIR ANDREW**

A mellifluous voice, as I am true knight.



**SIR TOBY**

A [contagious][20] [breath][19].

[19]: {{page.q}}=2003 "breath (n.) 2:  voice, song, sound"
[20]: {{page.q}}=3558 "contagious (adj.) 2:  infectious, catchy"


**SIR ANDREW**

Very sweet and contagious, i'faith.



**SIR TOBY**

To hear by the nose, it is [dulcet][22] in [contagion][21].
But shall we make the [welkin][23] dance indeed? Shall we
rouse the night-owl in a [catch][24] that will draw three [soul][25]s
out of one weaver? Shall we do that?

[21]: {{page.q}}=3559 "contagion (n.) 1:  contagious quality, infecting influence"
[22]: {{page.q}}=8485 "dulcet (adj.):  sweet, mild, pleasant, agreeable"
[23]: {{page.q}}=7770 "welkin (n.):  sky, firmament, heavens"
[24]: {{page.q}}=4196 "catch (n.):  musical round"
[25]: {{page.q}}=14698 "soul (n.) 1:  driving force, animating principle"


**SIR ANDREW**

An you love me, let's do't. I am [dog][26] at a
[catch][27].

[26]: {{page.q}}=9156 "dog at, be a:  be adept at, be experienced in"
[27]: {{page.q}}=4196 "catch (n.):  musical round"


**FESTE**

By'r lady, sir, and some dogs will catch well.



**SIR ANDREW**

Most certain. Let our catch be ‘ Thou
[knave][28].’

[28]: {{page.q}}=18989 "knave (n.) 1:  scoundrel, rascal, rogue"


**FESTE**

‘ Hold thy peace, thou knave,’ knight? I shall be
constrained in't to call thee [knave][29], knight.

[29]: {{page.q}}=18989 "knave (n.) 1:  scoundrel, rascal, rogue"


**SIR ANDREW**

'Tis not the first time I have constrained
one to call me knave. Begin, fool; it begins (he sings)
‘ Hold thy peace – ’



**FESTE**

I shall never begin if I hold my peace.



**SIR ANDREW**

Good, i'faith. Come, begin!
_Catch sung. Enter Maria_



**MARIA**

What a caterwauling do you keep here! If my lady
have not called up her steward Malvolio and bid him
turn you out of doors, never trust me.



**SIR TOBY**

My lady's a – [Cataian][30]; we are – [politician][31]s;
Malvolio's a – [Peg-a-Ramsey][32]; and (he sings)
Three merry men be we!
Am not I [consanguineous][33]? Am I not of her blood?
[Tilly-vally][34]! ‘ Lady ’! (He sings)
There dwelt a man in Babylon, lady, lady –

[30]: {{page.q}}=4166 "Cataian, Cathayan (n.):  [from Cathay = China] scoundrel, rogue, villain"
[31]: {{page.q}}=12218 "politician (n.):  schemer, intriguer, plotter"
[32]: {{page.q}}=13349 "Peg-a-Ramsey (n.):  [dance tune] name of a spying wife in a contemporary ballad"
[33]: {{page.q}}=3676 "consanguineous (adj.):  related in blood, of the same family"
[34]: {{page.q}}=6391 "tilly-fally, tilly-vally (int.):  nonsense, fiddlesticks"


**FESTE**

[Beshrew][35] me, the knight's in admirable fooling.

[35]: {{page.q}}=1534 "beshrew, 'shrew (v.) 1:  curse, devil take, evil befall"


**SIR ANDREW**

Ay, he does well enough if he be [disposed][36],
and so do I too. He does it with a better grace, but I do
it more [natural][37].

[36]: {{page.q}}=9384 "disposed (adj.) 4:  inclined to be merry, feeling playful"
[37]: {{page.q}}=11505 "natural (adv.):  like a half-wit, idiotically"


**SIR TOBY**

_sings_
O' the twelfth day of December –



**MARIA**

For the love o' God, peace!
_Enter Malvolio_



**MALVOLIO**

My masters, are you mad? Or what are you?
Have you no [wit][39], manners, nor [honesty][38], but to gabble
like tinkers at this time of night? Do ye make an ale-house
of my lady's house, that ye squeak out your
[cozier][41]s' [catch][40]es without any [mitigation][42] or [remorse][43] of
voice? Is there no respect of place, persons, nor time in
you?

[38]: {{page.q}}=18192 "honesty (n.) 4:  decency, decorum, good manners"
[39]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[40]: {{page.q}}=4196 "catch (n.):  musical round"
[41]: {{page.q}}=3560 "cozier (n.):  cobbler"
[42]: {{page.q}}=5851 "mitigation (n.):  lowering, softening, quietening"
[43]: {{page.q}}=17202 "remorse (n.) 3:  consideration, thoughtfulness for others"


**SIR TOBY**

We did keep time, sir, in our [catch][44]es. [Sneck][45] up!

[44]: {{page.q}}=4196 "catch (n.):  musical round"
[45]: {{page.q}}=15665 "sneck up (v.):  buzz off, go hang"


**MALVOLIO**

Sir Toby, I must be [round][46] with you. My lady
[bade][47] me tell you that, though she harbours you as her
kinsman, she's nothing allied to your disorders. If you
can separate yourself and your misdemeanours, you are
welcome to the house. If not, an it would please you to
take leave of her, she is very willing to bid you farewell.

[46]: {{page.q}}=16644 "round (adj.) 1:  blunt, forthright, straight, plain-spoken"
[47]: {{page.q}}=2049 "bid (v.), past form bade 1:  command, order, enjoin, tell"


**SIR TOBY**

_sings_
Farewell, dear heart, since I must needs be gone –



**MARIA**

Nay, good Sir Toby!



**FESTE**

_sings_
His eyes do show his days are almost done –



**MALVOLIO**

Is't even so!



**SIR TOBY**

_sings_
But I will never die –



**FESTE**

_sings_
Sir Toby, there you lie –



**MALVOLIO**

This is much credit to you!



**SIR TOBY**

_sings_
Shall I bid him go?



**FESTE**

_sings_
What an if you do?



**SIR TOBY**

_sings_
Shall I bid him go and spare not?



**FESTE**

_sings_
O no, no, no, no, you dare not!



**SIR TOBY**

Out o' tune, sir, ye lie. (To Malvolio) Art any
more than a steward? Dost thou think, because thou art
virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale?



**FESTE**

Yes, by Saint Anne, and ginger shall be hot i'the
mouth, too.



**SIR TOBY**

Th' art i'the right. (To Malvolio) Go, sir, rub
your [chain][48] with crumbs. A stoup of wine, Maria!

[48]: {{page.q}}=4482 "chain (n.):  chain of office"


**MALVOLIO**

Mistress Mary, if you prized my lady's favour
at anything more than contempt, you would not give
means for this uncivil rule. She shall know of it, by this
hand!
_Exit_



**MARIA**

Go, shake your ears.



**SIR ANDREW**

'Twere as good a deed as to drink when a
man's a-hungry, to challenge him the [field][49] and then to
break promise with him and make a fool of him.

[49]: {{page.q}}=20604 "field (n.) 2:  duelling place"


**SIR TOBY**

Do't, knight, I'll write thee a challenge; or I'll
deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.



**MARIA**

Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for tonight. Since the
youth of the Count's was today with my lady, she is
much out of quiet. For Monsieur Malvolio, let me alone
with him. If I do not [gull][50] him into a [nayword][51], and make
him a common [recreation][52], do not think I have [wit][53]
enough to lie straight in my bed. I know I can do it.

[50]: {{page.q}}=17969 "gull (v.):  deceive, dupe, trick"
[51]: {{page.q}}=11484 "nayword, nay-word (n.) 2:  byword, proverb"
[52]: {{page.q}}=17203 "recreation (n.) 2:  source of amusement, figure of fun"
[53]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"


**SIR TOBY**

[Possess][54] us, possess us, tell us something of him.

[54]: {{page.q}}=12567 "possess (v.) 1:  notify, inform, acquaint"


**MARIA**

Marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of puritan –



**SIR ANDREW**

O, if I thought that, I'd beat him like a dog.



**SIR TOBY**

What, for being a puritan? Thy [exquisite][55] reason,
dear knight?

[55]: {{page.q}}=10336 "exquisite (adj.) 2:  ingenious, abstruse, far-fetched"


**SIR ANDREW**

I have no exquisite reason for't, but I have
reason good enough.



**MARIA**

The devil a puritan that he is, or anything, [constantly][56],
but a [time-pleaser][59], an [affectioned][57] ass that [con][58]s
[state][61] without [book][60] and utters it by great [swathes][62]; the
best persuaded of himself, so crammed, as he thinks,
with excellencies, that it is his grounds of faith that all
that look on him love him – and on that vice in him will
my revenge find notable cause to work.

[56]: {{page.q}}=4279 "constantly (adv.) 2:  resolutely, steadfastly, steadily"
[57]: {{page.q}}=584 "affectioned (adj.):  affected, pretentious, self-willed"
[58]: {{page.q}}=2691 "con (v.) 1:  learn by heart, commit to memory"
[59]: {{page.q}}=6281 "time-pleaser (n.):  time-server, follower of fashion"
[60]: {{page.q}}=2276 "book, without:  off by heart, by rote"
[61]: {{page.q}}=15666 "state (n.) 14:  stately phrasing, high-flown expressions"
[62]: {{page.q}}=16548 "swarth (n.):  swathe, strip, chunk"


**SIR TOBY**

What wilt thou do?



**MARIA**

I will drop in his way some obscure epistles of
love; wherein, by the colour of his beard, the shape of
his leg, the manner of his [gait][64], the [expressure][63] of his eye,
forehead, and complexion, he shall find himself most
[feelingly][65] [personate][66]d. I can write very like my lady, your
niece; on a forgotten matter we can hardly make
distinction of our hands.

[63]: {{page.q}}=10115 "expressure (n.) 2:  expression, attitude, look"
[64]: {{page.q}}=17974 "gait (n.) 1:  manner of walking, bearing, movement"
[65]: {{page.q}}=20484 "feelingly (adv.) 1:  pertinently, aptly, to the point"
[66]: {{page.q}}=13254 "personate (v.) 1:  describe, represent, delineate"


**SIR TOBY**

Excellent! I smell a [device][67].

[67]: {{page.q}}=8403 "device (n.) 1:  plot, stratagem, trick"


**SIR ANDREW**

I have't in my nose too.



**SIR TOBY**

He shall think by the letters that thou wilt
drop that they come from my niece, and that she's in
love with him.



**MARIA**

My [purpose][68] is indeed a horse of that colour.

[68]: {{page.q}}=12449 "purpose (n.) 1:  intention, aim, plan"


**SIR ANDREW**

And your horse now would make him an
ass.



**MARIA**

Ass, I doubt not.



**SIR ANDREW**

O, 'twill be admirable!



**MARIA**

[Sport][70] royal, I [warrant][71] you. I know my [physic][69] will
work with him. I will plant you two, and let the fool
make a third, where he shall find the letter. Observe his
[construction][72] of it. For this night, to bed, and dream on
the [event][73]. Farewell.
_Exit_

[69]: {{page.q}}=12190 "physic (n.) 1:  medicine, healing, treatment"
[70]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[71]: {{page.q}}=7550 "warrant (v.) 1:  assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"
[72]: {{page.q}}=3059 "construction (n.) 1:  interpretation, reading, explanation"
[73]: {{page.q}}=9663 "event (n.):  outcome, issue, consequence"


**SIR TOBY**

Good night, Penthesilea.



**SIR ANDREW**

Before me, she's a good [wench][74].

[74]: {{page.q}}=7615 "wench (n.):  girl, lass"


**SIR TOBY**

She's a beagle true bred, and one that adores
me – what o' that?



**SIR ANDREW**

I was adored once, too.



**SIR TOBY**

Let's to bed, knight. Thou hadst need send for
more money.



**SIR ANDREW**

If I cannot [recover][75] your niece, I am a foul
way [out][76].

[75]: {{page.q}}=17204 "recover (v.) 2:  get hold of, obtain, get"
[76]: {{page.q}}=11925 "out (adv.) 8:  out of pocket"


**SIR TOBY**

Send for money, knight. If thou hast her not
i'the end, call me [cut][77].

[77]: {{page.q}}=2831 "cut (n.) 3:  work-horse, nag"


**SIR ANDREW**

If I do not, never trust me, take it how you
will.



**SIR TOBY**

Come, come, I'll go [burn][78] some [sack][79], 'tis too
late to go to bed now. Come, knight; come, knight.
_Exeunt_

[78]: {{page.q}}=2277 "burn (v.) 1:  warm up, spice up"
[79]: {{page.q}}=5941 "sack (n.):  [type of] white wine"
