---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act II - Scene IV
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 20:54:13 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act2_scene4.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Orsino, Viola, Curio, and others_

**ORSINO**

Give me some music! Now, good morrow, friends!
Now, good Cesario, but that piece of song,
That old and [antique][1] song we heard last night.
[Methought][2] it did relieve my [passion][3] much,
More than light airs and [recollected][4] [term][5]s
Of these most brisk and [giddy-paced][6] times.
Come, but one verse.

[1]: {{page.q}}=297 "antic, antick(e), antique (adj.) 3:  old-fashioned, old-world, antiquated"
[2]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[3]: {{page.q}}=12162 "passion (n.) 3:  suffering, torment, deep grief"
[4]: {{page.q}}=17205 "recollected (adj.):  studied, artificial, refined"
[5]: {{page.q}}=6232 "term (n.) 1:  word, expression, utterance"
[6]: {{page.q}}=17954 "giddy-paced:  whirling, moving at a bewildering pace"


**CURIO**

He is not here, so please your lordship, that should
sing it.



**ORSINO**

Who was it?



**CURIO**

Feste the jester, my lord, a fool that the Lady
Olivia's father took much delight in. He is about the
house.



**ORSINO**

Seek him out, and play the tune the while.
_Exit Curio_
_Music plays_
Come hither, boy. If ever thou shalt love,
In the sweet pangs of it, remember me.
For such as I am, all true lovers are:
[Unstaid][9] and [skittish][8] in all [motion][7]s else,
Save in the constant image of the creature
That is beloved. How dost thou like this tune?

[7]: {{page.q}}=11003 "motion (n.) 2:  emotion, inclination, desire, impulse"
[8]: {{page.q}}=15841 "skittish (adj.):  changeable, fickle, inconstant"
[9]: {{page.q}}=6995 "unstaid (adj.) 1:  unsteady, unsettled, vacillating"


**VIOLA**

It gives a very echo to the seat
Where love is throned.



**ORSINO**

Thou dost speak [masterly][10].
My life upon't, young though thou art, thine eye
Hath stayed upon some [favour][11] that it loves.
Hath it not, boy?

[10]: {{page.q}}=11004 "masterly (adv.):  from experience, in a masterly way"
[11]: {{page.q}}=20678 "favour (n.) 1:  [facial] appearance, countenance, features, looks"


**VIOLA**

A little, by your favour.



**ORSINO**

What kind of woman is't?



**VIOLA**

Of your complexion.



**ORSINO**

She is not worth thee, then. What years, i'faith?



**VIOLA**

About your years, my lord.



**ORSINO**

Too old, by heaven. Let [still][12] the woman take
An elder than herself; so [wear][13]s she to him;
So [sway][15]s she [level][14] in her husband's heart.
For, boy, however we do praise ourselves,
Our [fancies][16] are more [giddy][17] and [unfirm][18],
More longing, wavering, sooner lost and [worn][19],
Than women's are.

[12]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"
[13]: {{page.q}}=8037 "wear (v.) 3:  fashion, adapt, conform"
[14]: {{page.q}}=15352 "level (adj.) 1:  steady, steadfast, constant"
[15]: {{page.q}}=15842 "sway (v.) 3:  move, proceed, progress"
[16]: {{page.q}}=20677 "fancy (n.) 1:  love, amorousness, infatuation"
[17]: {{page.q}}=17604 "giddy (adj.) 1:  frivolous, flighty, fickle, irresponsible"
[18]: {{page.q}}=7083 "unfirm (adj.) 2:  unsteady, flighty, capricious"
[19]: {{page.q}}=7710 "worn (adj.):  worn out, exhausted, spent"


**VIOLA**

I think it well, my lord.



**ORSINO**

Then let thy love be younger than thyself,
Or thy [affection][20] cannot hold the [bent][21].
For women are as roses whose fair flower,
Being once [displayed][22], doth fall that very hour.

[20]: {{page.q}}=115 "affection (n.) 4:  love, devotion"
[21]: {{page.q}}=1446 "bent (n.) 3:  degree, capacity, extent [to which a bow can be bent]"
[22]: {{page.q}}=9190 "displayed (adj.) 1:  unfolded, opened, in full bloom"


**VIOLA**

And so they are. Alas, that they are so,
To die, even when they to perfection grow.
_Enter Curio and Feste_



**ORSINO**

O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.
[Mark][23] it, Cesario; it is [old][24] and plain.
The [spinster][25]s, and the knitters in the sun,
And the [free][27] maids that weave their thread with [bone][26]s,
Do use to chant it. It is [silly][28] [sooth][29],
And [dallies][30] with the innocence of love
Like the [old][31] age.

[23]: {{page.q}}=10405 "mark (v.) 1:  note, pay attention [to], take notice [of]"
[24]: {{page.q}}=11926 "old (adj.) 1:  olden, ancient, bygone"
[25]: {{page.q}}=5906 "spinster (n.):  domestic woman, one who stays at home spinning"
[26]: {{page.q}}=1084 "bone (n.) 2:  [weaving] bobbin made of bone"
[27]: {{page.q}}=20260 "free (adj.) 4:  free of worry, untroubled, carefree"
[28]: {{page.q}}=14945 "silly (adj.) 4:  simple, lowly, humble"
[29]: {{page.q}}=14813 "sooth (n.) 1:  truth"
[30]: {{page.q}}=9191 "dally (v.) 1:  deal lightly, play about, tease"
[31]: {{page.q}}=11926 "old (adj.) 1:  olden, ancient, bygone"


**FESTE**

Are you ready, sir?



**ORSINO**

Ay, prithee sing.
_Music plays_



**FESTE**

_sings_
Come away, come away, death,
And in [sad][32] cypress let me be laid.
[Fie][33] away, fie away, breath!
I am slain by a fair cruel maid.
My shroud of white, stuck all with yew,
O, prepare it!
My part of death, no one so [true][34]
Did share it.
Not a flower, not a flower sweet
On my black coffin let there be strewn.
Not a friend, not a friend [greet][35]
My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown.
A thousand thousand sighs to save,
Lay me, O, where
Sad true lover never find my grave
To weep there.

[32]: {{page.q}}=15557 "sad (adj.) 3:  downcast, distressed, mournful, gloomy"
[33]: {{page.q}}=20573 "fie away (v.):  be off, begone"
[34]: {{page.q}}=5599 "true (adj.) 1:  loyal, firm, faithful in allegiance"
[35]: {{page.q}}=17955 "greet (v.) 3:  bewail, lament, weep for"


**ORSINO**

There's for thy pains.
_He gives Feste money_



**FESTE**

No pains, sir. I take pleasure in singing, sir.



**ORSINO**

I'll pay thy pleasure, then.



**FESTE**

Truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid, one time or
another.



**ORSINO**

Give me now leave, to leave thee.



**FESTE**

Now the melancholy god protect thee, and the
tailor make thy doublet of [changeable][36] taffeta, for thy
mind is a very opal. I would have men of such constancy
put to sea, that their business might be everything,
and their [intent][37] everywhere; for that's it that
always makes a good voyage of nothing. Farewell.
_Exit Feste_

[36]: {{page.q}}=4483 "changeable (adj.):  of varying colour [when viewed from different angles], shot"
[37]: {{page.q}}=5207 "intent (n.):  intention, purpose, aim"


**ORSINO**

Let all the rest give place.
_Curio and attendants withdraw_
Once more, Cesario,
Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty.
Tell her my love, more noble than the [world][38],
Prizes not quantity of dirty lands.
The [part][39]s that fortune hath bestowed upon her
Tell her I hold as [giddily][40] as fortune.
But 'tis that miracle and queen of gems
That nature [prank][41]s her in, attracts my soul.

[38]: {{page.q}}=8038 "world (n.) 1:  whole of mankind, human race, mass of society"
[39]: {{page.q}}=12150 "part (n.) 1:  quality, attribute, gift, accomplishment [of mind or body]"
[40]: {{page.q}}=17956 "giddily (adv.) 1:  lightly, carelessly, inconsequentially"
[41]: {{page.q}}=12580 "prank (v.):  dress up, deck out, adorn"


**VIOLA**

But if she cannot love you, sir?



**ORSINO**

It cannot be so answered.



**VIOLA**

Sooth, but you must.
Say that some lady, as perhaps there is,
Hath for your love as great a pang of heart
As you have for Olivia. You cannot love her.
You tell her so. Must she not then be answered?



**ORSINO**

There is no woman's sides
Can [bide][42] the beating of so strong a passion
As love doth give my heart; no woman's heart
So big to hold so much, they lack [retention][43].
Alas, their love may be called [appetite][44],
No [motion][46] of the [liver][45], but the palate,
That [suffer][48] [surfeit][49], [cloyment][47], and revolt.
But mine is all as hungry as the sea,
And can digest as much. Make no [compare][50]
Between that love a woman can bear me
And that I owe Olivia.

[42]: {{page.q}}=2064 "bide (v.) 1:  endure, suffer, undergo"
[43]: {{page.q}}=17206 "retention (n.) 3:  [medicine] power to retain emotion"
[44]: {{page.q}}=482 "appetite (n.) 1:  desire, longing, inclination, fancy"
[45]: {{page.q}}=19152 "liver (n.) 1:  part of the body thought to be at the seat of the passions [especially sexual desire]"
[46]: {{page.q}}=11003 "motion (n.) 2:  emotion, inclination, desire, impulse"
[47]: {{page.q}}=3561 "cloyment (n.):  excessive gratification, gorging, satiety"
[48]: {{page.q}}=14101 "suffer (v.) 3:  undergo, sustain, endure"
[49]: {{page.q}}=5895 "surfeit (n.) 2:  sickness brought on by excess"
[50]: {{page.q}}=2889 "compare (n.):  comparison, simile, analogy"


**VIOLA**

Ay, but I know –



**ORSINO**

What dost thou know?



**VIOLA**

Too well what love women to men may owe.
In faith, they are as true of heart as we.
My father had a daughter loved a man –
As it might be perhaps, were I a woman,
I should your lordship.



**ORSINO**

And what's her history?



**VIOLA**

A blank, my lord. She never told her love,
But let concealment, like a [worm][51] i'the bud,
Feed on her [damask][52] cheek. She pined in [thought][53],
And with a green and yellow melancholy,
She sat like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed?
We men may say more, swear more, but indeed
Our [show][54]s are more than [will][56]; for [still][55] we prove
Much in our vows, but little in our love.

[51]: {{page.q}}=8043 "worm (n.) 2:  germ, microbe, bug"
[52]: {{page.q}}=8540 "damask (adj./n.):  light-red, pink [colour of the damask rose]"
[53]: {{page.q}}=5453 "thought (n.) 2:  melancholic reflection, anxiety, sorrow, worry"
[54]: {{page.q}}=15093 "show (n.) 1:  appearance, exhibition, display"
[55]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"
[56]: {{page.q}}=7725 "will (n.) 1:  desire, wish, liking, inclination"


**ORSINO**

But died thy sister of her love, my boy?



**VIOLA**

I am all the daughters of my father's house,
And all the brothers too; and yet, I know not. . . .
Sir, shall I to this lady?



**ORSINO**

Ay, that's the theme.
To her in haste; give her this jewel; say
My love can give no place, [bide][57] no [denay][58].
_Exeunt_

[57]: {{page.q}}=2064 "bide (v.) 1:  endure, suffer, undergo"
[58]: {{page.q}}=9192 "denay (n.):  denial, refusal, rejection"
