---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act II - Scene V
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 21:00:58 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act2_scene5.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Sir Toby, Sir Andrew, and Fabian_

**SIR TOBY**

Come thy ways, Signor Fabian.



**FABIAN**

Nay, I'll come. If I lose a [scruple][1] of this [sport][2],
let me be boiled to death with melancholy.

[1]: {{page.q}}=15643 "scruple (n.) 1:  tiny amount, last ounce"
[2]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"


**SIR TOBY**

Wouldst thou not be glad to have the [niggardly][3],
rascally [sheep-biter][4] come by some notable
shame?

[3]: {{page.q}}=11506 "niggardly (adj.):  mean-minded, tight-fisted, miserly"
[4]: {{page.q}}=15667 "sheep-biter (n.):  thievish fellow, shifty individual"


**FABIAN**

I would exult, man. You know he brought me
out o' favour with my lady about a bear-baiting here.



**SIR TOBY**

To anger him, we'll have the bear again, and
we will fool him black and blue – shall we not, Sir
Andrew?



**SIR ANDREW**

An we do not, it is pity of our lives.
_Enter Maria_



**SIR TOBY**

Here comes the little villain. How now, my
[metal][5] of India?

[5]: {{page.q}}=11005 "metal of India:  pure gold"


**MARIA**

Get ye all three into the [box-tree][6]. Malvolio's
coming down this walk, he has been yonder i'the sun
practising behaviour to his own shadow this half-hour.
Observe him, for the love of mockery, for I know this
letter will make a [contemplative][8] idiot of him. [Close][7], in
the name of jesting!
_The men hide. Maria throws down a letter_
Lie thou there – for here comes the trout that must be
caught with [tickling][9].
_Exit_
_Enter Malvolio_

[6]: {{page.q}}=2278 "box-tree:  type of ornamental thick shrub"
[7]: {{page.q}}=3088 "close (adv.) 6:  safely, secretly, out of sight"
[8]: {{page.q}}=3562 "contemplative (adj.):  vacant, vacuous, mindlessly gazing"
[9]: {{page.q}}=6282 "tickling (n.):  flattery, gratifying, pleasing"


**MALVOLIO**

'Tis but fortune, all is fortune. Maria once
told me she did [affect][10] me; and I have heard herself
come thus near, that should she [fancy][11], it should be one
of my [complexion][12]. Besides, she [use][13]s me with a more
exalted respect than anyone else that follows her. What
should I think on't?

[10]: {{page.q}}=197 "affect (v.) 1:  incline to, like, favour, be drawn to"
[11]: {{page.q}}=20476 "fancy (v.):  like, love, admire"
[12]: {{page.q}}=2687 "complexion (n.) 1:  appearance, look, colouring"
[13]: {{page.q}}=7006 "use (v.) 2:  treat, deal with, manage"


**SIR TOBY**

Here's an [overweening][14] rogue!

[14]: {{page.q}}=11674 "overweening (adj.):  arrogant, overambitious, high and mighty"


**FABIAN**

O, peace! Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock
of him; how he [jet][16]s under his [advanced][15] plumes!

[15]: {{page.q}}=216 "advanced (adj.):  raised up, held high, uplifted"
[16]: {{page.q}}=18917 "jet (v.):  strut, swagger, parade"


**SIR ANDREW**

'Slight, I could so beat the rogue!



**SIR TOBY**

Peace, I say!



**MALVOLIO**

To be Count Malvolio . . .



**SIR TOBY**

Ah, rogue!



**SIR ANDREW**

[Pistol][17] him, pistol him!

[17]: {{page.q}}=13255 "pistol (v.):  shoot with a pistol"


**SIR TOBY**

Peace, peace!



**MALVOLIO**

There is [example][18] for't. The lady of the
Strachy married the [yeoman][19] of the wardrobe.

[18]: {{page.q}}=10177 "example (n.):  precedent, parallel case"
[19]: {{page.q}}=8356 "yeoman (n.) 2:  keeper of the wardrobe"


**SIR ANDREW**

Fie on him! Jezebel!



**FABIAN**

O, peace! Now he's [deeply][20] in. Look how
imagination [blow][21]s him.

[20]: {{page.q}}=9278 "deeply (adv.) 1:  profoundly, thoroughly, sincerely"
[21]: {{page.q}}=2279 "blow (v.) 4:  puff up, swell, inflate"


**MALVOLIO**

Having been three months married to her,
sitting in my [state][22] . . .

[22]: {{page.q}}=14548 "state (n.) 8:  throne, chair of state"


**SIR TOBY**

O for a [stone-bow][23] to hit him in the eye!

[23]: {{page.q}}=15668 "stone-bow (n.):  type of cross-bow which shoots stones, catapult"


**MALVOLIO**

Calling my officers about me, in my [branched][24]
velvet gown, having come from a [day-bed][25], where I have
left Olivia sleeping . . .

[24]: {{page.q}}=2280 "branched:  embroidered, brocaded"
[25]: {{page.q}}=9254 "day-bed (n.):  couch, sofa, divan"


**SIR TOBY**

Fire and brimstone!



**FABIAN**

O, peace, peace!



**MALVOLIO**

And then to have the [humour][26] of [state][27]; and
after a [demure][28] [travel][30] of [regard][29] – telling them I know my
place, as I would they should do theirs – to ask for my
kinsman Toby.

[26]: {{page.q}}=18379 "humour (n.) 3:  style, method, way, fashion"
[27]: {{page.q}}=13887 "state (n.) 2:  status, rank, position"
[28]: {{page.q}}=9193 "demure (adj.):  grave, serious, sober, solemn"
[29]: {{page.q}}=17052 "regard (n.) 4:  look, glance, gaze"
[30]: {{page.q}}=6283 "travail, travel (n.) 3:  movement, motion, passage"


**SIR TOBY**

Bolts and shackles!



**FABIAN**

O, peace, peace, peace! Now, now!



**MALVOLIO**

Seven of my people, with an obedient [start][31],
[make][32] out for him. I frown the while, and [perchance][33]
wind up my watch, or play with my (fingering his
steward's chain of office) – some rich jewel. Toby
approaches, [curtsies][34] there to me . . .

[31]: {{page.q}}=15846 "start (n.) 1:  starting up, immediate reaction, sudden movement"
[32]: {{page.q}}=11006 "make out (v.):  go, go out"
[33]: {{page.q}}=12175 "perchance (adv.) 1:  perhaps, maybe"
[34]: {{page.q}}=3563 "curtsy, curtsey (v.):  bow low, do reverence, pay respect"


**SIR TOBY**

Shall this fellow live?



**FABIAN**

Though our silence be drawn from us with [car][35]s,
yet peace!

[35]: {{page.q}}=3953 "car (n.):  carriage, cart, chariot [often of the sun god]"


**MALVOLIO**

I extend my hand to him thus – quenching
my familiar smile with an austere [regard][36] of control . . .

[36]: {{page.q}}=17052 "regard (n.) 4:  look, glance, gaze"


**SIR TOBY**

And does not Toby take you a blow o'the lips
then?



**MALVOLIO**

Saying, Cousin Toby, my fortunes having
cast me on your niece give me this prerogative of
speech . . .



**SIR TOBY**

What, what!



**MALVOLIO**

You must amend your drunkenness.



**SIR TOBY**

Out, [scab][37]!

[37]: {{page.q}}=15669 "scab (n.):  scurvy fellow, scoundrel, villain"


**FABIAN**

Nay, patience, or we break the [sinew][38]s of our plot.

[38]: {{page.q}}=15509 "sinew (n.) 4:  mainstay, support, main strength"


**MALVOLIO**

Besides, you waste the treasure of your time
with a foolish knight . . .



**SIR ANDREW**

That's me, I [warrant][39] you.

[39]: {{page.q}}=7550 "warrant (v.) 1:  assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"


**MALVOLIO**

One Sir Andrew.



**SIR ANDREW**

I knew 'twas I, for many do call me fool.



**MALVOLIO**

_picks up the letter_
What employment have
we here?



**FABIAN**

Now is the [woodcock][41] near the [gin][40].

[40]: {{page.q}}=17627 "gin (n.):  snare, trap"
[41]: {{page.q}}=8010 "woodcock (n.):  type of game bird, thought to be easily tricked or snared; simpleton"


**SIR TOBY**

O, peace, and the spirit of [humour][42]s intimate
reading aloud to him!

[42]: {{page.q}}=18215 "humour (n.) 2:  fancy, whim, inclination, caprice"


**MALVOLIO**

By my life, this is my lady's hand. These be
her very C's, her U's and her T's; and thus makes she
her great P's. It is, in contempt of [question][43], her hand.

[43]: {{page.q}}=13851 "question, in contempt of:  without the shadow of a doubt"


**SIR ANDREW**

Her C's, her U's and her T's? Why that?



**MALVOLIO**

_reads_
_To the unknown beloved this, and my good wishes._
Her very phrases! By your leave, wax. Soft! and the
[impressure][44] her Lucrece, with which she uses to [seal][45].
'Tis my lady! To whom should this be?

[44]: {{page.q}}=4840 "impressure (n.):  imprint, impression, indentation, stamp"
[45]: {{page.q}}=15166 "seal (v.) 4:  mark by seal, put one's name to, agree"


**FABIAN**

This wins him, liver and all.



**MALVOLIO**

_reads_
_Jove knows I love;_
_But who?_
_Lips, do not move;_
_No man must know._
‘ No man must know ’! What follows? The [number][46]s
altered! ‘ No man must know ’! If this should be thee,
Malvolio!

[46]: {{page.q}}=11488 "number (n.) 2:  (plural) metre, versification"


**SIR TOBY**

Marry, hang thee, [brock][47]!

[47]: {{page.q}}=2290 "brock (n.):  badger; [contemptuous] stinker, dirty rat"


**MALVOLIO**

_reads_
_I may command where I adore;_
_But silence, like a Lucrece' knife,_
_With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore;_
_M.O.A.I. doth sway my life._



**FABIAN**

A [fustian][48] riddle!

[48]: {{page.q}}=20668 "fustian (adj.) 1:  high-flown, made up in a ridiculous way"


**SIR TOBY**

Excellent [wench][49], say I!

[49]: {{page.q}}=7615 "wench (n.):  girl, lass"


**MALVOLIO**

‘ M.O.A.I. doth sway my life.’ Nay, but first
let me see, let me see, let me see. . . .



**FABIAN**

What dish o' poison has she dressed him!



**SIR TOBY**

And with what wing the [staniel][51] [check][50]s at it!

[50]: {{page.q}}=4485 "check at (v.) 2:  [falconry] swerve to pounce on, turn towards, swoop at"
[51]: {{page.q}}=15705 "staniel (n.):  inferior kind of hawk; kestrel"


**MALVOLIO**

‘ I may command where I adore.’ Why, she
may command me. I serve her, she is my lady. Why,
this is evident to any [formal][53] [capacity][52]. There is no
[obstruction][54] in this. And the end: what should that alphabetical
[position][56] [portend][55]? If I could make that resemble
something in me. . . . [Softly][57], ‘ M.O.A.I.’ . . .

[52]: {{page.q}}=3945 "capacity (n.):  intelligence, understanding, capability"
[53]: {{page.q}}=20167 "formal (adj.) 1:  normal, sane, rational"
[54]: {{page.q}}=11930 "obstruction (n.) 1:  obstacle, difficulty, hindrance"
[55]: {{page.q}}=12916 "portend (v.):  mean, signify, import"
[56]: {{page.q}}=13274 "position (n.) 3:  arrangement, ordering, sequence"
[57]: {{page.q}}=14020 "softly (adv.):  slowly, gently"


**SIR TOBY**

O, ay, make up that. He is now at a cold scent.



**FABIAN**

[Sowter][59] will [cry][58] upon't for all this, though it be as
[rank][60] as a fox.

[58]: {{page.q}}=3724 "cry (v.) 2:  give tongue, cry out"
[59]: {{page.q}}=15706 "Sowter (n.):  [shoemaker, cobbler] name of a stupid hound"
[60]: {{page.q}}=16564 "rank (adj.) 2:  foul-smelling, stinking"


**MALVOLIO**

M . . . Malvolio! M! Why, that begins my
name!



**FABIAN**

Did not I say he would work it out? The cur is
excellent at [fault][61]s.

[61]: {{page.q}}=20669 "fault (n.) 5:  [hunting] break in a line of scent, loss of scent"


**MALVOLIO**

M! But then there is no [consonancy][62] in the
sequel that [suffer][64]s under [probation][63]. A should follow,
but O does.

[62]: {{page.q}}=3587 "consonancy (n.) 2:  consistency, correspondance, accord"
[63]: {{page.q}}=13275 "probation (n.) 2:  investigation, examination, testing"
[64]: {{page.q}}=15707 "suffer (v.) 5:  hold up, stand up, remain valid"


**FABIAN**

And O shall end, I hope.



**SIR TOBY**

Ay, or I'll cudgel him and make him cry O.



**MALVOLIO**

And then I comes behind.



**FABIAN**

Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might
see more [detraction][65] at your heels than fortunes before
you.

[65]: {{page.q}}=8756 "detraction (n.):  slander, calumny, defamation, disparagement"


**MALVOLIO**

M.O.A.I. This [simulation][66] is not as the
former. And yet, to [crush][67] this a little, it would bow to
me, for every one of these letters are in my name. Soft!
Here follows prose.
_He reads_
_If this fall into thy hand, revolve. In my stars I am above_
_thee, but be not afraid of greatness. Some are born great,_
_some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust_
_upon 'em. Thy fates open their hands, let thy blood and_
_spirit embrace them; and to inure thyself to what thou art_
_like to be, cast thy humble slough and appear fresh. Be_
_opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants. Let thy_
_tongue tang arguments of state. Put thyself into the trick of_
_singularity. She thus advises thee that sighs for thee._
_Remember who commended thy yellow stockings and wished_
_to see thee ever cross-gartered. I say, remember. Go to, thou_
_art made if thou desirest to be so. If not, let me see thee a_
_steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthy to_
_touch Fortune's fingers. Farewell. She that would alter_
_services with thee, The Fortunate Unhappy._
Daylight and [champain][68] [discover][69]s not more! This is
open. I will be proud, I will read [politic][70] authors, I will
[baffle][71] Sir Toby, I will wash off [gross][72] acquaintance, I
will be [point-devise][73] the very man. I do not now fool
myself, to let imagination [jade][74] me; for every reason
[excite][76]s to this, that my lady loves me. She did [commend][75]
my yellow stockings of late, she did praise my leg being
cross-gartered; and in this she manifests herself to my
love and with a kind of injunction drives me to these
[habit][77]s of her liking. I thank my stars, I am happy! I
will be [strange][79], [stout][78], in yellow stockings and cross-gartered,
even with the swiftness of putting on. Jove and
my stars be praised! Here is yet a postscript.
_He reads_
_Thou canst not choose but know who I am. If thou entertainest_
_my love, let it appear in thy smiling, thy smiles_
_become thee well. Therefore in my presence still smile, dear_
_my sweet, I prithee._
Jove, I thank thee! I will smile. I will do everything that
thou wilt have me!
_Exit_

[66]: {{page.q}}=15708 "simulation (n.):  dissimulation, concealment, disguised meaning"
[67]: {{page.q}}=4799 "crush (v.) 2:  force the sense of, strain a meaning from"
[68]: {{page.q}}=4394 "champain, champaign (n./adj.):  expanse of open countryside"
[69]: {{page.q}}=8538 "discover (v.) 1:  reveal, show, make known"
[70]: {{page.q}}=12473 "politic (adj.) 1:  prudent, cautious, discreet, shrewd"
[71]: {{page.q}}=1330 "baffle (v.) 1:  [of a knight] publicly disgrace, treat with infamy"
[72]: {{page.q}}=17624 "gross (adj.) 9:  dull, obtuse, ignorant"
[73]: {{page.q}}=13327 "point-device, point-devise (adv.):  to the last detail, to the point of perfection"
[74]: {{page.q}}=18948 "jade (v.) 2:  deceive, dupe, make a fool of"
[75]: {{page.q}}=2872 "commend (v.) 4:  praise, admire, extol"
[76]: {{page.q}}=9961 "excite (v.):  incite, stir up, move"
[77]: {{page.q}}=15263 "habit (n.) 1:  dress, clothing, costume"
[78]: {{page.q}}=14464 "stout (adj.) 2:  proud, haughty, arrogant"
[79]: {{page.q}}=15811 "strange (adj.) 7:  aloof, distant, reserved"


**FABIAN**

I will not give my part of this [sport][80] for a pension
of thousands to be paid from the Sophy.

[80]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"


**SIR TOBY**

I could marry this [wench][81] for this device.

[81]: {{page.q}}=7615 "wench (n.):  girl, lass"


**SIR ANDREW**

So could I too.



**SIR TOBY**

And ask no other dowry with her but such another
jest.



**SIR ANDREW**

Nor I neither.
_Enter Maria_



**FABIAN**

Here comes my noble gull-catcher.



**SIR TOBY**

Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?



**SIR ANDREW**

Or o' mine either?



**SIR TOBY**

Shall I [play][82] my freedom at [tray-trip][83] and become
thy [bondslave][84]?

[82]: {{page.q}}=13379 "play (v.) 3:  play for, make bets about"
[83]: {{page.q}}=6339 "tray-trip (n.):  type of dicing game [depending on the throw of a three]"
[84]: {{page.q}}=2007 "bondslave (n.):  slave, bondsman, person in a condition of servitude"


**SIR ANDREW**

I'faith, or I either?



**SIR TOBY**

Why, thou hast put him in such a dream, that
when the image of it leaves him, he must run mad.



**MARIA**

Nay, but say true: does it work upon him?



**SIR TOBY**

Like [aqua-vitae][85] with a midwife.

[85]: {{page.q}}=273 "aqua-vitae (n.):  spirits, alcohol, strong drink, brandy"


**MARIA**

If you will then see the fruits of the [sport][86], [mark][87]
his first approach before my lady. He will come to her in
yellow stockings, and 'tis a colour she [abhor][88]s; and cross-gartered,
a fashion she detests; and he will smile upon
her, which will now be so unsuitable to her disposition –
being addicted to a melancholy as she is – that it cannot
but turn him into a [notable][90] [contempt][89]. If you will see it,
follow me.

[86]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[87]: {{page.q}}=10405 "mark (v.) 1:  note, pay attention [to], take notice [of]"
[88]: {{page.q}}=654 "abhor (v.) 1:  loathe, abominate, regard with disgust"
[89]: {{page.q}}=3653 "contempt (n.) 2:  disgrace, dishonour, scandal"
[90]: {{page.q}}=11464 "notable (adj.) 1:  noted, notorious, conspicuous, infamous"


**SIR TOBY**

To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent
devil of [wit][91]!

[91]: {{page.q}}=7645 "wit (n.) 2:  mental sharpness, acumen, quickness, ingenuity"


**SIR ANDREW**

I'll make one too.
_Exeunt_

