---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act III - Scene IV
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 21:23:22 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act3_scene4.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Olivia and Maria_

**OLIVIA**

_aside_
I have sent after him, he says he'll come.
How shall I feast him? What [bestow][1] of him?
For youth is bought more [oft][2] than begged or borrowed.
I speak too loud.
(To Maria) Where's Malvolio? He is sad and civil,
And suits well for a servant with my fortunes.
Where is Malvolio?

[1]: {{page.q}}=1712 "bestow (v.) 2:  give as a gift [to], present [with]"
[2]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.):  often"


**MARIA**

He's coming, madam, but in very strange manner.
He is sure possessed, madam.



**OLIVIA**

Why, what's the matter? Does he rave?



**MARIA**

No, madam, he does nothing but smile. Your
ladyship were best to have some guard about you, if he
come, for sure the man is [tainted][3] in's [wits][4].

[3]: {{page.q}}=6203 "tainted (adj.) 1:  infected, diseased"
[4]: {{page.q}}=8049 "wits, also five wits:  faculties of the mind (common wit, imagination, fantasy, estimation, memory) or body (the five senses)"


**OLIVIA**

Go, call him hither.
_Exit Maria_
I am as mad as he
If [sad][5] and merry madness equal be.
_Enter Malvolio and Maria_
How now, Malvolio?

[5]: {{page.q}}=13906 "sad (adj.) 1:  serious, grave, solemn"


**MALVOLIO**

Sweet lady! Ho! Ho!



**OLIVIA**

Smil'st thou? I sent for thee upon a [sad][6] occasion.

[6]: {{page.q}}=13906 "sad (adj.) 1:  serious, grave, solemn"


**MALVOLIO**

Sad, lady? I could be sad; this does make
some obstruction in the blood, this [cross-gartering][7] – but
what of that? If it please the eye of one, it is with me as
the very true [sonnet][8] is: ‘Please one and please all'.

[7]: {{page.q}}=4796 "cross-gartering (n.):  wearing garters crossed along the legs"
[8]: {{page.q}}=15816 "sonnet (n.) 1:  song, lyric"


**OLIVIA**

Why, how dost thou, man? What is the matter
with thee?



**MALVOLIO**

Not black in my mind, though yellow in my
legs. It did come to his hands; and commands shall be
executed. I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.



**OLIVIA**

Wilt thou go to bed, Malvolio?



**MALVOLIO**

To bed! ‘ Ay, sweetheart, and I'll come to
thee!’



**OLIVIA**

God comfort thee! Why dost thou smile so, and
kiss thy hand so [oft][9]?

[9]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.):  often"


**MARIA**

How do you, Malvolio?



**MALVOLIO**

At your request? Yes; nightingales answer
[daw][10]s.

[10]: {{page.q}}=8615 "daw (n.) 1:  jackdaw [as noted for its stupidity]; dolt, fool"


**MARIA**

Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness
before my lady?



**MALVOLIO**

‘ Be not afraid of greatness.’ 'Twas well writ.



**OLIVIA**

What mean'st thou by that, Malvolio?



**MALVOLIO**

‘ Some are born great – ’



**OLIVIA**

Ha?



**MALVOLIO**

‘ Some achieve greatness – ’



**OLIVIA**

What sayest thou?



**MALVOLIO**

‘ And some have greatness thrust upon
them.’



**OLIVIA**

Heaven restore thee!



**MALVOLIO**

‘ Remember who [commend][11]ed thy yellow
stockings – ’

[11]: {{page.q}}=2872 "commend (v.) 4:  praise, admire, extol"


**OLIVIA**

Thy yellow stockings?



**MALVOLIO**

‘ – and wished to see thee [cross-gartered][12].’

[12]: {{page.q}}=3684 "cross-gartered (adj.):  with garters crossed along the legs"


**OLIVIA**

Cross-gartered?



**MALVOLIO**

‘ Go to, thou art made if thou desir'st to be
so.’



**OLIVIA**

Am I maid!



**MALVOLIO**

‘ If not, let me see thee a servant still.’



**OLIVIA**

Why, this is very midsummer madness.
_Enter a Servant_



**SERVANT**

Madam, the young gentleman of the Count
Orsino's is returned. I could [hardly][13] entreat him back. He
[attend][14]s your ladyship's pleasure.

[13]: {{page.q}}=18252 "hardly (adv.) 1:  with great difficulty, only with difficulty"
[14]: {{page.q}}=78 "attend (v.) 1:  await, wait for, expect"


**OLIVIA**

I'll come to him.
_Exit Servant_
Good Maria, let this fellow be looked to. Where's my
cousin Toby? Let some of my people have a special care
care of him. I would not have him [miscarry][15] for the half of
my dowry.
_Exeunt Olivia and Maria different ways_

[15]: {{page.q}}=10536 "miscarry (v.) 1:  come to harm, perish, meet death"


**MALVOLIO**

O ho! Do you [come][16] near me now? No worse
man than Sir Toby to look to me! This concurs directly
with the letter. She sends him on purpose, that I may
appear stubborn to him; for she incites me to that in
the letter. ‘ Cast thy humble slough,’ says she. ‘ Be
opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants, let thy
tongue tang with arguments of state, put thyself into the
trick of singularity ’ – and [consequently][17] sets down the
manner how: as, a [sad][20] face, a [reverend][19] [carriage][18], a slow
tongue, in the [habit][21] of some [sir][22] of note, and so forth. I
have [lime][23]d her! But it is Jove's doing, and Jove make me
thankful! And when she went away now – ‘ let this fellow
be looked to.’ Fellow! Not ‘ Malvolio,’ nor after my
[degree][24], but ‘ [fellow][25] ’! Why, everything adheres together,
that no [dram][26] of a [scruple][27], no scruple of a scruple, no
obstacle, no [incredulous][28] or unsafe circumstance – what
can be said? – nothing that can be, can come between
me and the full prospect of my hopes. Well, Jove, not I,
is the doer of this, and he is to be thanked.
_Enter Sir Toby, Fabian, and Maria_

[16]: {{page.q}}=3659 "come near (v.) 2:  begin to understand, start to appreciate"
[17]: {{page.q}}=3124 "consequently (adv.):  subsequently, later, then"
[18]: {{page.q}}=4144 "carriage (n.) 1:  bearing, demeanour, manner of behaviour"
[19]: {{page.q}}=16628 "reverend (adj.):  revered, worthy, respected"
[20]: {{page.q}}=13906 "sad (adj.) 1:  serious, grave, solemn"
[21]: {{page.q}}=15263 "habit (n.) 1:  dress, clothing, costume"
[22]: {{page.q}}=15151 "sir (n.) 2:  gentleman, lord, gallant, master"
[23]: {{page.q}}=19542 "lime (v.) 1:  trap, snare, catch [as if by using birdlime]"
[24]: {{page.q}}=8590 "degree (n.) 1:  rank, station, standing"
[25]: {{page.q}}=20074 "fellow (n.) 2:  counterpart, match, equal"
[26]: {{page.q}}=8471 "dram (n.) 1:  tiny amount, small quantity"
[27]: {{page.q}}=15643 "scruple (n.) 1:  tiny amount, last ounce"
[28]: {{page.q}}=5228 "incredulous (adj.):  incredible, unbelievable"


**SIR TOBY**

Which way is he, in the name of sanctity? If all
the devils of hell be drawn in [little][29] and Legion himself
possessed him, yet I'll speak to him.

[29]: {{page.q}}=19150 "little, in:  on a small scale, in miniature"


**FABIAN**

Here he is, here he is. How is't with you, sir?
How is't with you, man?



**MALVOLIO**

Go off, I discard you. Let me enjoy my [private][30].
Go off.

[30]: {{page.q}}=13332 "private (n.) 1:  privacy, own company, solitude"


**MARIA**

Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him. Did
not I tell you? Sir Toby, my lady prays you to have a
care of him.



**MALVOLIO**

Ah ha! Does she so!



**SIR TOBY**

Go to, go to! Peace, peace, we must deal gently
with him. Let me alone. How do you, Malvolio? How
is't with you? What, man, defy the devil! Consider,
he's an enemy to mankind.



**MALVOLIO**

Do you know what you say?



**MARIA**

La you, an you speak [ill][31] of the devil, how he takes
it at heart! Pray God he be not bewitched!

[31]: {{page.q}}=4953 "ill (adv.) 1:  badly, adversely, unfavourably"


**FABIAN**

Carry his [water][32] to the [wise][33]woman.

[32]: {{page.q}}=8088 "water (n.) 3:  urine"
[33]: {{page.q}}=7792 "wise woman, wisewoman (n.):  fortune-teller, witch, sorceress"


**MARIA**

Marry, and it shall be done tomorrow morning, if
I live. My lady would not lose him, for more than I'll
say.



**MALVOLIO**

How now, mistress?



**MARIA**

O Lord!



**SIR TOBY**

Prithee, hold thy peace, this is not the way. Do
you not see you [move][34] him? Let me alone with him.

[34]: {{page.q}}=10634 "move (v.) 2:  move to anger, provoke, exasperate"


**FABIAN**

No way but gentleness, gently, gently. The fiend
is rough, and will not be roughly used.



**SIR TOBY**

Why, how now, my [bawcock][35]? How dost thou,
[chuck][36]?

[35]: {{page.q}}=1036 "bawcock (n.):  [fine bird] fine fellow, good chap"
[36]: {{page.q}}=4498 "chuck (n.):  chicken, chick [usually as a term of endearment]"


**MALVOLIO**

Sir!



**SIR TOBY**

Ay, [biddy][37], come with me. What, man, 'tis not
for [gravity][39] to play at [cherry-pit][38] with Satan. Hang him,
foul [collier][40]!

[37]: {{page.q}}=1073 "biddy (n.):  chicken; chickabiddy [as childish form]"
[38]: {{page.q}}=4499 "cherry-pit (n.):  [children's game] throwing cherry-stones into a hole"
[39]: {{page.q}}=17659 "gravity (n.) 1:  respectability, authority, dignified position"
[40]: {{page.q}}=3660 "collier (n.):  coalman, coal-vendor"


**MARIA**

Get him to say his prayers, good Sir Toby; get him
to pray.



**MALVOLIO**

My prayers, minx!



**MARIA**

No, I [warrant][41] you, he will not hear of godliness.

[41]: {{page.q}}=7550 "warrant (v.) 1:  assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"


**MALVOLIO**

Go, hang yourselves all. You are idle, shallow
things; I am not of your [element][42]. You shall know more
hereafter.
_Exit Malvolio_

[42]: {{page.q}}=9923 "element (n.) 7:  place, sphere, station"


**SIR TOBY**

Is't possible?



**FABIAN**

If this were played upon a stage now, I could
condemn it as an improbable fiction.



**SIR TOBY**

His very [genius][43] hath taken the infection of the
[device][44], man.

[43]: {{page.q}}=17990 "genius (n.) 1:  soul, spirit, being"
[44]: {{page.q}}=8403 "device (n.) 1:  plot, stratagem, trick"


**MARIA**

Nay, pursue him now, lest the [device][46] take [air][45], and
[taint][47].

[45]: {{page.q}}=634 "air, take:  become known, spread about"
[46]: {{page.q}}=8403 "device (n.) 1:  plot, stratagem, trick"
[47]: {{page.q}}=6342 "taint (v.) 5:  spoil, go rotten"


**FABIAN**

Why, we shall make him mad indeed.



**MARIA**

The house will be the quieter.



**SIR TOBY**

Come, we'll have him in a dark room and
bound. My niece is already in the belief that he's mad.
We may [carry][48] it thus for our pleasure and his penance
till our very pastime, tired out of breath, prompt us to
have mercy on him; at which time, we will bring the
[device][49] to the bar, and crown thee for a [finder][50] of madmen.
But see, but see!
_Enter Sir Andrew_

[48]: {{page.q}}=4233 "carry (v.) 8:  maintain, keep going, carry on with"
[49]: {{page.q}}=8403 "device (n.) 1:  plot, stratagem, trick"
[50]: {{page.q}}=20713 "finder (n.):  jury-member who determines if someone is insane, ascertainer"


**FABIAN**

More matter for a May morning!



**SIR ANDREW**

Here's the challenge, read it. I [warrant][51]
there's vinegar and pepper in't.

[51]: {{page.q}}=7550 "warrant (v.) 1:  assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"


**FABIAN**

Is't so [saucy][52]?

[52]: {{page.q}}=14344 "saucy (adj.) 1:  insolent, impudent, presumptuous, defiant"


**SIR ANDREW**

Ay, is't, I [warrant][53] him. Do but read.

[53]: {{page.q}}=7550 "warrant (v.) 1:  assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"


**SIR TOBY**

Give me.
_He reads_
_Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow._



**FABIAN**

Good and valiant.



**SIR TOBY**

_reads_
_Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind,_
_why I do call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for't._



**FABIAN**

A good note, that keeps you from the blow of the
law.



**SIR TOBY**

_reads_
_Thou com'st to the Lady Olivia, and in_
_my sight she uses thee kindly. But thou liest in thy throat;_
_that is not the matter I challenge thee for._



**FABIAN**

Very brief, and to exceeding good sense – (aside)
less!



**SIR TOBY**

_reads_
_I will waylay thee going home; where, if_
_it be thy chance to kill me_



**FABIAN**

Good!



**SIR TOBY**

_reads_
_thou kill'st me like a rogue and a_
_villain._



**FABIAN**

[Still][54] you keep o' the [windy][55] side of the law;
good.

[54]: {{page.q}}=14556 "still (adv.) 2:  ever, now [as before]"
[55]: {{page.q}}=8050 "windy (adj.):  windward, situated towards the wind [so that scent will travel away from the follower]"


**SIR TOBY**

_reads_
_Fare thee well, and God have mercy upon_
_one of our souls. He may have mercy upon mine, but my_
_hope is better – and so, look to thyself. Thy friend as thou_
_usest him, and thy sworn enemy, Andrew Aguecheek._
this letter move him not, his legs cannot. I'll give't him.



**MARIA**

You may have very [fit][56] occasion for't. He is now in
some [commerce][58] with my lady, and will [by and by][57]
depart.

[56]: {{page.q}}=19837 "fit (adj.) 1:  suited, fitting, appropriate"
[57]: {{page.q}}=1950 "by and by (adv.) 2:  shortly, soon, before long"
[58]: {{page.q}}=2674 "commerce (n.):  dealings, transactions, intercourse"


**SIR TOBY**

Go, Sir Andrew. [Scout][59] me for him at the
corner of the [orchard][61] like a [bum-baily][60]. So soon as ever
thou seest him, draw, and as thou drawest, swear horrible;
for it comes to pass [oft][62] that a terrible oath, with a
swaggering accent sharply twanged off, gives manhood
more [approbation][63] than ever [proof][64] itself would have
earned him. Away!

[59]: {{page.q}}=15818 "scout (v.) 2:  keep a look-out, watch out"
[60]: {{page.q}}=1074 "bum-baily, bum-bailiff (n.):  bailiff, sheriff's officer [who catches people by sneaking up behind them]"
[61]: {{page.q}}=11618 "orchard (n.):  garden"
[62]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.):  often"
[63]: {{page.q}}=372 "approbation (n.) 2:  proof, confirmation, attestation"
[64]: {{page.q}}=12273 "proof (n.) 3:  test, trial"


**SIR ANDREW**

Nay, let me [alone][65] for swearing.
_Exit_

[65]: {{page.q}}=113 "alone, let [one] 1:  leave it to [one], you can rely on [one]"


**SIR TOBY**

Now will not I deliver his letter. For the behaviour
of the young gentleman gives him out to be of
good capacity and breeding; his employment between
his lord and my niece confirms no less. Therefore this
letter, being so excellently ignorant, will breed no terror
in the youth; he will find it comes from a [clodpole][66]. But,
sir, I will deliver his challenge by word of mouth; set
upon Aguecheek a notable report of valour, and drive
the gentleman – as I know his youth will [aptly][67] [receive][68] it
– into a most hideous opinion of his rage, skill, fury, and
impetuosity. This will so [fright][69] them both, that they
will kill one another by the look, like [cockatrice][70]s.
_Enter Olivia and Viola_

[66]: {{page.q}}=3661 "clodpole (n.):  blockhead, thickhead, dolt"
[67]: {{page.q}}=44 "aptly (adv.):  easily, readily"
[68]: {{page.q}}=16580 "receive (v.) 1:  consider, believe, regard"
[69]: {{page.q}}=19973 "fright (v.), past form frighted:  frighten, scare, terrify"
[70]: {{page.q}}=3443 "cockatrice (n.):  murderous serpent, basilisk"


**FABIAN**

Here he comes with your niece. Give them way
till he take leave, and [presently][71] after him.

[71]: {{page.q}}=12248 "presently (adv.) 1:  immediately, instantly, at once"


**SIR TOBY**

I will meditate the while upon some [horrid][72]
message for a challenge.
_Exit Maria_
_Sir Toby and Fabian stand aside_

[72]: {{page.q}}=18197 "horrid (adj.):  horrifying, frightful, terrifying"


**OLIVIA**

I have said too much unto a heart of stone,
And laid mine honour too [unchary][73] on't.
There's something in me that reproves my fault.
But such a headstrong, potent fault it is,
That it but mocks reproof.

[73]: {{page.q}}=7016 "unchary (adv.):  carelessly, incautiously, unguardedly"


**VIOLA**

With the same '[haviour][74] that your [passion][75] bears
Goes on my master's griefs.

[74]: {{page.q}}=18145 "haviour (n.):  behaviour, manner, demeanour"
[75]: {{page.q}}=12162 "passion (n.) 3:  suffering, torment, deep grief"


**OLIVIA**

Here, wear this [jewel][76] for me, 'tis my picture.
Refuse it not, it hath no tongue to [vex][77] you.
And, I beseech you, come again tomorrow.
What shall you ask of me that I'll deny,
That honour saved may upon asking give?

[76]: {{page.q}}=18950 "jewel (n.) 2:  miniature in a jewelled setting"
[77]: {{page.q}}=7261 "vex (v.):  afflict, trouble, torment"


**VIOLA**

Nothing but this: your true love for my master.



**OLIVIA**

How with mine honour may I give him that
Which I have given to you?



**VIOLA**

I will [acquit][78] you.

[78]: {{page.q}}=635 "acquit (v.) 1:  release, free, discharge"


**OLIVIA**

Well, come again tomorrow. [Fare][79] thee well.
A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.
_Exit_
_Sir Toby and Fabian come forward_

[79]: {{page.q}}=20910 "fare ... well: "


**SIR TOBY**

Gentleman, God save thee!



**VIOLA**

And you, sir.



**SIR TOBY**

That [defence][81] thou hast, [betake][80] thee to't. Of
what nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know
not; but thy intercepter, full of [despite][83], [bloody][82] as the
hunter, [attend][84]s thee at the [orchard][86] end. [Dismount][85] thy
[tuck][87]; be [yare][88] in thy preparation; for thy assailant is
quick, skilful, and deadly.

[80]: {{page.q}}=1713 "betake (v.) 2:  resort, have recourse, commit oneself"
[81]: {{page.q}}=8384 "defence (n.) 1:  fencing, swordsmanship, skill of self-defence"
[82]: {{page.q}}=1075 "bloody (adj.) 1:  blood-thirsty, warlike, ferocious"
[83]: {{page.q}}=8628 "despite (n.) 2:  malice, spite, hatred"
[84]: {{page.q}}=78 "attend (v.) 1:  await, wait for, expect"
[85]: {{page.q}}=9241 "dismount (v.) 2:  [fencing] draw, remove from the sheath"
[86]: {{page.q}}=11618 "orchard (n.):  garden"
[87]: {{page.q}}=5686 "tuck (n.):  rapier, long slender sword"
[88]: {{page.q}}=8327 "yare (adj.) 2:  quick, deft, adept"


**VIOLA**

You mistake, sir. I am sure no man hath any
quarrel to me. My [remembrance][89] is very free and clear
from any image of offence done to any man.

[89]: {{page.q}}=17226 "remembrance (n.) 1:  memory, bringing to mind, recollection"


**SIR TOBY**

You'll find it otherwise, I assure you. Therefore,
if you hold your life at any price, [betake][90] you to
your guard; for your [opposite][91] hath in him what youth,
strength, skill, and wrath can furnish man withal.

[90]: {{page.q}}=1713 "betake (v.) 2:  resort, have recourse, commit oneself"
[91]: {{page.q}}=11730 "opposite (n.) 1:  opponent, adversary, anatagonist"


**VIOLA**

I pray you, sir, what is he?



**SIR TOBY**

He is knight dubbed with [unhatched][92] rapier and
on [carpet][93] consideration – but he is a devil in private
brawl. Souls and bodies hath he divorced three; and his
[incensement][94] at this moment is so implacable, that
satisfaction can be none, but by pangs of death, and
sepulchre. [Hob][95], nob! is his word: give't or take't.

[92]: {{page.q}}=7017 "unhatched (adj.) 2:  unmarked, unhacked; or: undrawn"
[93]: {{page.q}}=4055 "carpet (adj.):  for exploits ‘on the carpet’ [relating to the court, appropriate to a drawing room] not ‘in the field’"
[94]: {{page.q}}=5229 "incensement (n.):  anger, wrath, fury"
[95]: {{page.q}}=18655 "hob, nob:  give or take, come what may"


**VIOLA**

I will return again into the house and desire some
[conduct][96] of the lady. I am no fighter. I have heard of
some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on others
to [taste][99] their valour. [Belike][97] this is a man of that [quirk][98].

[96]: {{page.q}}=3091 "conduct (n.) 4:  care, protection"
[97]: {{page.q}}=1442 "belike (adv.):  probably, presumably, perhaps, so it seems"
[98]: {{page.q}}=13860 "quirk (n.) 1:  trick, turn, peculiarity"
[99]: {{page.q}}=6341 "taste (v.) 1:  try out, test, put to the proof"


**SIR TOBY**

Sir, no. His indignation derives itself out of a
very [computent][100] injury. Therefore, get you on and give
him his desire. Back you shall not to the house, unless
you [undertake][101] that with me, which with as much safety
you might answer him. Therefore on, or strip your
sword stark naked; for [meddle][102] you must, that's certain,
or [forswear][103] to wear iron about you.

[100]: {{page.q}}=3662 "competent, computent (adj.) 2:  to be reckoned with, needing to be settled"
[101]: {{page.q}}=6869 "undertake (v.) 5:  take on, fight with, engage in combat with"
[102]: {{page.q}}=5844 "meddle (v.) 1:  fight, engage in combat, exchange blows"
[103]: {{page.q}}=19977 "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 2:  abandon, renounce, reject, give up"


**VIOLA**

This is as uncivil as strange. I beseech you, do me
this courteous [office][105], as to [know][104] of the knight what my
offence to him is. It is something of my negligence,
nothing of my [purpose][106].

[104]: {{page.q}}=19064 "know (v.) 4:  find out, ascertain, learn [from]"
[105]: {{page.q}}=11936 "office (n.) 1:  task, service, duty, responsibility"
[106]: {{page.q}}=12449 "purpose (n.) 1:  intention, aim, plan"


**SIR TOBY**

I will do so. Signor Fabian, stay you by this
gentleman till my return.
_Exit_



**VIOLA**

Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter?



**FABIAN**

I know the knight is incensed against you, even
to a [mortal][108] [arbitrement][107], but nothing of the circumstance
more.

[107]: {{page.q}}=385 "arbitrament, arbitrement (n.) 1:  deciding of a dispute, determination, settlement"
[108]: {{page.q}}=10654 "mortal (adj.) 1:  fatal, deadly, lethal"


**VIOLA**

I beseech you, what manner of man is he?



**FABIAN**

Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him
by his [form][109], as you are [like][110] to find him in the [proof][111]
of his valour. He is indeed, sir, the most skilful, [bloody][112],
and [fatal][113] [opposite][114] that you could possibly have found in
any part of Illyria. Will you walk towards him? I will
make your peace with him, if I can.

[109]: {{page.q}}=19871 "form (n.) 8:  physical appearance, outward appearance"
[110]: {{page.q}}=19137 "like (adv.) 1:  likely, probable / probably"
[111]: {{page.q}}=12508 "proof (n.) 4:  evidence, demonstration, testimony"
[112]: {{page.q}}=1075 "bloody (adj.) 1:  blood-thirsty, warlike, ferocious"
[113]: {{page.q}}=20543 "fatal (adj.) 3:  death-dealing, death-boding"
[114]: {{page.q}}=11730 "opposite (n.) 1:  opponent, adversary, anatagonist"


**VIOLA**

I shall be much bound to you for't. I am one that
had rather go with Sir Priest than Sir Knight; I care not
who knows so much of my mettle.
_Enter Sir Toby and Sir Andrew_



**SIR TOBY**

Why, man, he's a very devil. I have not seen
such a [firago][115]. I had a [pass][116] with him, rapier, scabbard
and all; and he gives me the [stuck-in][118] with such a [mortal][117]
[motion][121] that it is [inevitable][120]; and on the [answer][119], he [pay][122]s
you as surely as your feet hits the ground they step on.
They say he has been fencer to the Sophy.

[115]: {{page.q}}=20714 "firago (n.):  virago, hero, fighter"
[116]: {{page.q}}=12156 "pass (n.) 2:  bout, exchange, round [in fencing]"
[117]: {{page.q}}=10654 "mortal (adj.) 1:  fatal, deadly, lethal"
[118]: {{page.q}}=15819 "stuck-in (n.):  [fencing] thrust, lunge"
[119]: {{page.q}}=32 "answer (n.) 5:  [fencing] return hit"
[120]: {{page.q}}=5230 "inevitable:  unavoidable, unable to be averted"
[121]: {{page.q}}=10477 "motion (n.) 10:  [fencing] attack, execution"
[122]: {{page.q}}=12359 "pay (v.) 2:  punish, pay back, retaliate against"


**SIR ANDREW**

Pox on't! I'll not meddle with him.



**SIR TOBY**

Ay, but he will not now be pacified. Fabian can
scarce hold him yonder.



**SIR ANDREW**

Plague on't! An I thought he had been
valiant, and so cunning in fence, I'd have seen him
damned ere I'd have challenged him. Let him let the
matter slip, and I'll give him my horse, grey Capilet.



**SIR TOBY**

I'll make the [motion][123]. Stand here, make a good
show on't. This shall end without the [perdition][124] of souls.
(Aside, as he crosses to Fabian) Marry, I'll ride your
horse as well as I ride you! (To Fabian) I have his horse
to [take][125] up the quarrel. I have persuaded him the youth's
a devil.

[123]: {{page.q}}=10610 "motion (n.) 6:  proposal, proposition, suggestion, offer"
[124]: {{page.q}}=12997 "perdition (n.) 1:  ruin, destruction, devastation"
[125]: {{page.q}}=5422 "take up (v.) 1:  settle, make up, resolve"


**FABIAN**

He is as horribly [conceited][126] of him, and pants and
looks pale as if a bear were at his heels.

[126]: {{page.q}}=3663 "conceited (adj.) 2:  of the same opinion, minded"


**SIR TOBY**

_to Viola_
There's no remedy, sir, he will fight
with you for's oath's sake. Marry, he hath better
bethought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now scarce
to be worth talking of. Therefore, draw for the [supportance][127]
of his vow. He protests he will not hurt you.

[127]: {{page.q}}=14531 "supportance (n.):  support, propping up, reinforcement"


**VIOLA**

_aside_
Pray God defend me! A little thing would
make me tell them how much I lack of a man.



**FABIAN**

Give ground if you see him furious.



**SIR TOBY**

_crossing to Sir Andrew_
Come, Sir Andrew,
there's no remedy. The gentleman will, for his honour's
_duello_
avoid it. But he has promised me, as he is a gentleman
and a soldier, he will not hurt you. Come on, to't!



**SIR ANDREW**

Pray God, he keep his oath!
_He draws_
_Enter Antonio_



**VIOLA**

I do assure you, 'tis against my will.
_She draws_



**ANTONIO**

Put up your sword. If this young gentleman
Have done offence, I take the [fault][128] on me.
If you offend him, I for him defy you.

[128]: {{page.q}}=20223 "fault (n.) 1:  sin, offence, crime"


**SIR TOBY**

You, sir? Why, what are you?



**ANTONIO**

One, sir, that for his love dares yet do more
Than you have heard him brag to you he will.



**SIR TOBY**

Nay, if you be an [undertaker][129], I am for you.
_Enter Officers_

[129]: {{page.q}}=5768 "undertaker (n.) 1:  person who takes on a task"


**FABIAN**

O good Sir Toby, hold! Here come the Officers.



**SIR TOBY**

_to Antonio_
I'll be with you [anon][130].

[130]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1:  soon, shortly, presently"


**VIOLA**

_to Sir Andrew_
Pray sir, put your sword up, if
you please.



**SIR ANDREW**

Marry, will I, sir. And for that I promised
you, I'll be as good as my word. He will bear you easily,
and reins well.



**FIRST OFFICER**

This is the man; do thy [office][131].

[131]: {{page.q}}=11936 "office (n.) 1:  task, service, duty, responsibility"


**SECOND OFFICER**

Antonio, I arrest thee at the [suit][132]
Of Count Orsino.

[132]: {{page.q}}=14102 "suit (n.) 1:  formal request, entreaty, petition"


**ANTONIO**

You do mistake me, sir.



**FIRST OFFICER**

No, sir, no jot. I know your [favour][133] well,
Though now you have no sea-cap on your head.
Take him away; he knows I know him well.

[133]: {{page.q}}=20678 "favour (n.) 1:  [facial] appearance, countenance, features, looks"


**ANTONIO**

I must obey. (To Viola) This comes with seeking you.
But there's no remedy, I shall [answer][134] it.
What will you do, now my necessity
Makes me to ask you for my purse? It grieves me
Much more for what I cannot do for you
Than what [befall][136]s myself. You stand [amazed][135];
But be of comfort.

[134]: {{page.q}}=231 "answer (v.) 4:  suffer the consequences [for], be accountable [for]"
[135]: {{page.q}}=356 "amazed (adj.):  dumbfounded, stunned, thunderstruck, overwhelmed"
[136]: {{page.q}}=1555 "befall (v.), past forms befallen, befell 2:  happen to, come to"


**SECOND OFFICER**

Come, sir, away!



**ANTONIO**

I must entreat of you some of that money.



**VIOLA**

What money, sir?
For the fair kindness you have showed me here,
And part being prompted by your present trouble,
Out of my [lean][138] and low [ability][137],
I'll lend you something. My [having][139] is not much.
I'll make division of my [present][140] with you.
Hold: there's half my [coffer][141].

[137]: {{page.q}}=689 "ability (n.) 3:  means, resources, funds"
[138]: {{page.q}}=19341 "lean (adj.) 1:  slight, mean, poor"
[139]: {{page.q}}=18500 "having (n.) 1:  fortune, estate, means"
[140]: {{page.q}}=13333 "present (n.) 2:  available means, current resources"
[141]: {{page.q}}=3664 "coffer (n.) 2:  funds, money, wealth"


**ANTONIO**

Will you deny me now?
Is't possible that my [desert][142]s to you
Can lack persuasion? Do not [tempt][143] my misery,
Lest that it make me so unsound a man
As to upbraid you with those kindnesses
That I have done for you.

[142]: {{page.q}}=8630 "desert, desart (n.) 3:  worthy deed, meritorious action"
[143]: {{page.q}}=5615 "tempt (v.) 1:  try, test, make trial of"


**VIOLA**

I know of none.
Nor know I you by voice or any feature.
I hate ingratitude more in a man
Than lying, [vainness][144], babbling drunkenness,
Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption
Inhabits our frail blood –

[144]: {{page.q}}=7433 "vainness (n.):  boasting, ostentation, vanity"


**ANTONIO**

O heavens themselves!



**SECOND OFFICER**

Come, sir, I pray you go.



**ANTONIO**

Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here
I snatched one half out of the jaws of death;
[Relieve][145]d him with such [sanctity][146] of love;
And to his [image][147], which [methought][148] did promise
Most [venerable][149] worth, did I devotion.

[145]: {{page.q}}=16961 "relieve (v.):  aid, assist, rescue"
[146]: {{page.q}}=15820 "sanctity (n.) 2:  true devotion, sacred intensity"
[147]: {{page.q}}=5247 "image (n.) 4:  appearance, aspect, countenance"
[148]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[149]: {{page.q}}=7434 "venerable:  commanding esteem, deserving of great respect"


**FIRST OFFICER**

What's that to us? The time goes by. Away!



**ANTONIO**

But O, how [vild][150] an idol proves this god!
Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame.
In nature, there's no blemish but the mind;
None can be called deformed, but the unkind.
Virtue is beauty; but the beauteous evil
Are empty trunks [o'er-flourished][151] by the devil.

[150]: {{page.q}}=7327 "vile, vild (adj.) 3:  shameful, contemptible, wretched"
[151]: {{page.q}}=11947 "over-flourish (v.):  heavily embellish, richly decorate"


**FIRST OFFICER**

The man grows mad; away with him. Come, come, sir.



**ANTONIO**

Lead me on.
_Exeunt Antonio and Officers_



**VIOLA**

_aside_
[Methinks][152] his words do from such passion fly
That he believes himself; so do not I?
Prove true, imagination, O, prove true –
That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!

[152]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"


**SIR TOBY**

Come hither, knight; come hither, Fabian.
We'll whisper o'er a [couplet][153] or two of most [sage][154] [saw][155]s.

[153]: {{page.q}}=4779 "couplet (n.) 1:  couple, brace"
[154]: {{page.q}}=13909 "sage (adj.):  solemn, grave, dignified"
[155]: {{page.q}}=13918 "saw (n.):  wise saying, platitude, maxim"


**VIOLA**

He named Sebastian. I my brother know
Yet living in my [glass][156]. Even such and so
In [favour][157] was my brother; and he went
[Still][158] in this fashion, colour, ornament,
For him I imitate. O, if it [prove][159],
Tempests are kind, and salt waves fresh in love!
_Exit_

[156]: {{page.q}}=17507 "glass (n.) 1:  mirror, looking-glass"
[157]: {{page.q}}=20678 "favour (n.) 1:  [facial] appearance, countenance, features, looks"
[158]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"
[159]: {{page.q}}=13334 "prove (v.) 4:  prove to be true, turn out to be the truth"


**SIR TOBY**

A very [dishonest][160], paltry boy, and more a
coward than a hare. His [dishonesty][161] appears in leaving
his friend here in necessity and [deny][162]ing him; and for his
[cowardship][163], ask Fabian.

[160]: {{page.q}}=9182 "dishonest (adj.) 2:  dishonourable, discreditable, shameful"
[161]: {{page.q}}=8982 "dishonesty (n.) 1:  dishonour, shameful deed, disgraceful action"
[162]: {{page.q}}=8652 "deny (v.) 4:  disown, disavow, renounce"
[163]: {{page.q}}=3666 "cowardship (n.):  cowardice, fearfulness, timidity"


**FABIAN**

A coward, a most devout coward, [religious][164] in it!

[164]: {{page.q}}=17255 "religious (adj.) 1:  devout, conscientious, scrupulous"


**SIR ANDREW**

'Slid! I'll after him again and beat him.



**SIR TOBY**

Do, cuff him soundly, but never draw thy
sword.



**SIR ANDREW**

An I do not –
_Exit_



**FABIAN**

Come, let's see the [event][165].

[165]: {{page.q}}=9663 "event (n.):  outcome, issue, consequence"


**SIR TOBY**

I dare lay any money, 'twill be nothing yet.
_Exeunt_

