---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act III - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 21:13:40 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act3_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Sir Toby, Sir Andrew, and Fabian_

**SIR ANDREW**

No, faith, I'll not stay a jot longer.



**SIR TOBY**

Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.



**FABIAN**

You must needs [yield][1] your reason, Sir Andrew.

[1]: {{page.q}}=8280 "yield (v.) 8:  communicate, deliver, represent"


**SIR ANDREW**

Marry, I saw your niece do more favours to
the Count's servingman than ever she bestowed upon
me. I saw't i'the [orchard][2].

[2]: {{page.q}}=11618 "orchard (n.):  garden"


**SIR TOBY**

Did she see thee the while, old boy, tell me
that?



**SIR ANDREW**

As plain as I see you now.



**FABIAN**

This was a great [argument][3] of love in her toward
you.

[3]: {{page.q}}=171 "argument (n.) 6:  proof, evidence, demonstration"


**SIR ANDREW**

'Slight! Will you make an ass o' me?



**FABIAN**

I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of
judgement and reason.



**SIR TOBY**

And they have been grand-jury men since before
Noah was a sailor.



**FABIAN**

She did show favour to the youth in your sight
only to exasperate you, to awake your [dormouse][4] valour,
to put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver. You
should then have accosted her, and with some excellent
jests fire-new from the mint, you should have banged
the youth into dumbness. This was looked for at your
hand, and this was [baulked][5]. The double gilt of this
opportunity you let time wash off, and you are now
sailed into the north of my lady's opinion; where you
will hang like an icicle on a Dutchman's beard, unless you
do redeem it by some laudable attempt either of valour
or [policy][6].

[4]: {{page.q}}=9239 "dormouse (adj.):  sleepy, dozing, slumbering"
[5]: {{page.q}}=2510 "balk (v.) 1:  refuse, ignore, shirk, let slip"
[6]: {{page.q}}=12216 "policy (n.) 1:  statecraft, statesmanship, diplomacy"


**SIR ANDREW**

An't be any way, it must be with valour, for
policy I hate. I had as [lief][7] be a Brownist as a [politician][8].

[7]: {{page.q}}=19129 "lief, had as:  should like just as much"
[8]: {{page.q}}=12218 "politician (n.):  schemer, intriguer, plotter"


**SIR TOBY**

Why then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis
of valour. Challenge me the Count's youth to fight with
him; hurt him in eleven places; my niece shall take note
of it – and, assure thyself, there is no love-broker in the
world can more prevail in man's commendation with
woman than report of valour.



**FABIAN**

There is no way but this, Sir Andrew.



**SIR ANDREW**

Will either of you bear me a challenge to
him?



**SIR TOBY**

Go, write it in a martial hand. Be [curst][9] and
brief. It is no matter how witty, so it be eloquent and
full of [invention][10]. Taunt him with the licence of ink. If
[thou][11] ‘ thou’-est him some thrice it shall not be amiss, and
as many lies as will lie in thy sheet of paper – although
the sheet were big enough for the bed of Ware in England,
set 'em down, go about it. Let there be [gall][12] enough
in thy ink, though thou write with a [goose][13] pen, no
matter. About it!

[9]: {{page.q}}=3144 "curst (adj.) 1:  bad-tempered, quarrelsome, shrewish, cross"
[10]: {{page.q}}=5182 "invention (n.) 3:  novelty, fresh creation, innovation"
[11]: {{page.q}}=6363 "thou (v.):  use ‘thou’ to someone as an insult"
[12]: {{page.q}}=17479 "gall (n.) 3:  spirit of anger, venom, ability to be angry"
[13]: {{page.q}}=18007 "goose pen (n.):  goose-quill, quill-pen"


**SIR ANDREW**

Where shall I find you?



**SIR TOBY**

We'll call thee at thy [cubiculo][14]. Go!
_Exit Sir Andrew_

[14]: {{page.q}}=3657 "cubiculo (n.):  bedroom, bedchamber"


**FABIAN**

This is a dear [manikin][15] to you, Sir Toby.

[15]: {{page.q}}=5841 "manikin (n.):  little man, puppet"


**SIR TOBY**

I have been dear to him, lad, some two thousand
strong or so.



**FABIAN**

We shall have a [rare][16] letter from him. But you'll
not deliver it?

[16]: {{page.q}}=16677 "rare (adj.) 1:  marvellous, splendid, excellent"


**SIR TOBY**

Never trust me then – and by all means stir on
the youth to an answer. I think oxen and [wain-rope][17]s
cannot [hale][18] them together. For Andrew, if he were
opened and you find so much blood in his liver as will
clog the foot of a flea, I'll eat the rest of the [anatomy][19].

[17]: {{page.q}}=8086 "wain-rope (n.):  waggon-rope"
[18]: {{page.q}}=18279 "hale (v.) 1:  drag, pull, haul"
[19]: {{page.q}}=877 "anatomy (n.) 2:  body, cadaver, corpse"


**FABIAN**

And his opposite the youth bears in his [[visage][21]][20] no
great [presage][22] of cruelty.
_Enter Maria_

[20]: {{page.q}}=7226 "visage (n.) 1:  face, countenance"
[21]: {{page.q}}=7227 "visage (n.) 2:  outward appearance, aspect, air"
[22]: {{page.q}}=13330 "presage (n.) 1:  sign, indication, portent"


**SIR TOBY**

Look where the youngest wren of nine comes.



**MARIA**

If you desire the [spleen][23], and will laugh yourselves
into stitches, follow me. Yond [gull][24] Malvolio is turned
heathen, a very [renegado][25]; for there is no Christian, that
means to be saved by believing rightly, can ever believe
such impossible [passage][27]s of [grossness][26]. He's in yellow
stockings!

[23]: {{page.q}}=15814 "spleen (n.) 4:  amusement, delight, merriment"
[24]: {{page.q}}=17861 "gull (n.) 1:  dupe, fool, simpleton"
[25]: {{page.q}}=17252 "renegado (n.):  renegade, turncoat, deserter"
[26]: {{page.q}}=17740 "grossness (n.) 1:  flagrant nature, obviousness, enormity"
[27]: {{page.q}}=12158 "passage (n.) 1:  incident, occurrence, event, happening"


**SIR TOBY**

And cross-gartered?



**MARIA**

Most villainously; like a [pedant][28] that keeps a
school i'the church. I have dogged him like his murderer.
He does obey every point of the letter that I
dropped to betray him. He does [smile][29] his face into more
lines than is in the new map with the [augmentation][30] of
the Indies. You have not seen such a thing as 'tis. I can
hardly [forbear][31] hurling things at him; I know my lady
will strike him. If she do, he'll smile, and take it for a
great favour.

[28]: {{page.q}}=13331 "pedant (n.):  schoolmaster, teacher"
[29]: {{page.q}}=16148 "smile (v.) 1:  make something happen by smiling"
[30]: {{page.q}}=633 "augmentation (n.):  additional detail, fuller account"
[31]: {{page.q}}=19857 "forbear (v.) 2:  leave alone, avoid, stay away [from]"


**SIR TOBY**

Come, bring us, bring us where he is.
_Exeunt_

