---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act III - Scene III
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 21:15:44 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act3_scene3.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Sebastian and Antonio_

**SEBASTIAN**

I would not by my will have troubled you.
But since you make your pleasure of your pains,
I will no further [chide][1] you.

[1]: {{page.q}}=4299 "chide (v.), past form chid 1:  scold, rebuke, reprove"


**ANTONIO**

I could not stay behind you. My desire,
More sharp than filed steel, did spur me forth,
And not all love to see you – though so much
As might have drawn one to a longer voyage –
But [jealousy][3] what might [befall][2] your travel,
Being [skill-less][4] in these parts; which to a stranger,
Unguided and unfriended, often prove
Rough and unhospitable. My willing love,
The rather by these arguments of fear,
Set forth in your pursuit.

[2]: {{page.q}}=1555 "befall (v.), past forms befallen, befell 2:  happen to, come to"
[3]: {{page.q}}=18949 "jealousy (n.) 3:  concern, anxiety, solicitude"
[4]: {{page.q}}=15020 "skill-less, skilless (adj.):  ignorant, unaware, unacquainted [with]"


**SEBASTIAN**

My kind Antonio,
I can no other answer make but thanks,
And thanks. And ever [oft][5] good turns
Are shuffled off with such [uncurrent][6] pay.
But were my [worth][8], as is my [conscience][7], firm,
You should find better dealing. What's to do?
Shall we go see the [reliques][9] of this town?

[5]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.):  often"
[6]: {{page.q}}=6660 "uncurrent (adj.) 1:  unacceptable, not legally current, worthless"
[7]: {{page.q}}=3658 "conscience (n.) 3:  sense of indebtedness, feeling of obligation"
[8]: {{page.q}}=8087 "worth (n.) 2:  means, resources, wherewithal"
[9]: {{page.q}}=17253 "reliques (n.):  antiquities, ancient ruins, old places"


**ANTONIO**

Tomorrow, sir; best first go see your lodging.



**SEBASTIAN**

I am not weary, and 'tis long to night.
I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes
With the memorials and the things of fame
That do [renown][10] this city.

[10]: {{page.q}}=17254 "renown (v.):  bring renown to, make famous"


**ANTONIO**

Would you'd pardon me.
I do not without danger walk these streets.
Once in a seafight 'gainst the Count his galleys
I did some service – of such note indeed
That, were I ta'en here, it would [scarce][12] be [answer][11]ed.

[11]: {{page.q}}=138 "answer (v.) 3:  satisfy, discharge, requite"
[12]: {{page.q}}=15815 "scarce (adv.) 2:  with difficulty, hardly possible"


**SEBASTIAN**

[Belike][13] you slew great number of his people?

[13]: {{page.q}}=1442 "belike (adv.):  probably, presumably, perhaps, so it seems"


**ANTONIO**

Th' offence is not of such a bloody nature,
Albeit the [quality][14] of the time and quarrel
Might well have given us [bloody][15] argument.
It might have since been answered in repaying
What we took from them, which, for [traffic][16]'s sake,
Most of our city did. Only myself stood out.
For which, if I be [lapse][17]d in this place,
I shall pay dear.

[14]: {{page.q}}=13755 "quality (n.) 1:  nature, disposition, character"
[15]: {{page.q}}=1057 "bloody (adj.) 2:  able to cause bloodshed"
[16]: {{page.q}}=5616 "traffic (n.) 1:  trade, commerce, business, merchandise"
[17]: {{page.q}}=19575 "lapse (v.) 2:  apprehend, seize, detain"


**SEBASTIAN**

Do not then walk too [open][18].

[18]: {{page.q}}=11958 "open (adv.):  out in the open, in public"

**ANTONIO**

It doth not [fit][19] me. Hold, sir, here's my purse.
In the south suburbs, at the Elephant,
Is best to lodge. I will [bespeak][20] our [diet][21]
Whiles you [beguile][22] the time, and feed your knowledge
With viewing of the town. There shall you have me.

[19]: {{page.q}}=19838 "fit (v.) 1:  suit, befit, be suitable [for]"
[20]: {{page.q}}=1537 "bespeak (v.), past forms bespake, bespoke 1:  ask for, order, request"
[21]: {{page.q}}=8410 "diet (n.) 1:  board, daily need"
[22]: {{page.q}}=1439 "beguile (v.) 4:  charm away, while away, pass pleasantly"


**SEBASTIAN**

Why I your purse?



**ANTONIO**

[Haply][23] your eye shall light upon some [toy][24]
You have desire to purchase; and your [store][25],
I think, is not for [idle][26] [market][27]s, sir.

[23]: {{page.q}}=15270 "haply (adv.):  perhaps, maybe, by chance, with luck"
[24]: {{page.q}}=5523 "toy (n.) 3:  trinket, trifle, trivial ornament"
[25]: {{page.q}}=15857 "store (n.) 3:  available money, resources, means"
[26]: {{page.q}}=5139 "idle (adj.) 5:  trifling, unimportant, trivial"
[27]: {{page.q}}=5842 "market (n.) 1:  purchase, spending opportunity, outlay"


**SEBASTIAN**

I'll be your purse-bearer, and leave you for
An hour.



**ANTONIO**

To th' Elephant.



**SEBASTIAN**

I do remember.
_Exeunt seperately_

