---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act III - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 21:08:56 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act3_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter at different entrances Viola, and Feste playing_

_his pipe and tabor_

**VIOLA**

Save thee, friend, and thy music. Dost thou live by
thy [tabor][1]?

[1]: {{page.q}}=5633 "tabor (n.):  type of small drum, especially used in revelling"


**FESTE**

No, sir, I live by the church.



**VIOLA**

Art thou a Churchman?



**FESTE**

No such matter, sir; I do live by the church. For I
do live at my house, and my house doth stand by the
church.



**VIOLA**

So thou mayst say the king [lie][2]s by a beggar, if a
beggar dwell near him; or the Church [stand][3]s by thy
tabor, if thy tabor stand by the church.

[2]: {{page.q}}=19536 "lie (v.) 4:  sleep, go to bed"
[3]: {{page.q}}=15813 "stand by (v.) 3:  support, uphold, maintain"


**FESTE**

You have [said][4], sir. To see this age! A sentence is
but a [cheveril][5] glove to a good [wit][6]; how quickly the
wrong side may be turned outward!

[4]: {{page.q}}=16376 "say (v.) 6:  speak the truth, speak to the point"
[5]: {{page.q}}=4497 "cheveril (adj.):  flexible, yielding, pliant"
[6]: {{page.q}}=8225 "wit (n.) 6:  lively person, sharp-minded individual"


**VIOLA**

Nay, that's certain. They that [dally][7] [nicely][8] with
words may quickly make them [wanton][9].

[7]: {{page.q}}=9191 "dally (v.) 1:  deal lightly, play about, tease"
[8]: {{page.q}}=11375 "nicely (adv.) 2:  subtly, triflingly, fancifully"
[9]: {{page.q}}=8084 "wanton (adj.) 10:  equivocal, ambiguous, uncontrollable"


**FESTE**

I would therefore my sister had had no name, sir.



**VIOLA**

Why, man?



**FESTE**

Why, sir, her name's a word, and to dally with that
word might make my sister [wanton][10]. But indeed, words
are very rascals, since [bond][11]s disgraced them.

[10]: {{page.q}}=7940 "wanton (adj.) 5:  sexually hot, passionate, sportive"
[11]: {{page.q}}=1995 "bond (n.) 1:  deed, contract, pledge"


**VIOLA**

Thy reason, man?



**FESTE**

Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words, and
words are grown so [false][12], I am loath to prove reason
with them.

[12]: {{page.q}}=19980 "false (adj.) 3:  sham, spurious, not genuine, artificial"


**VIOLA**

I [warrant][13] thou art a merry fellow, and car'st for
nothing.

[13]: {{page.q}}=7550 "warrant (v.) 1:  assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"


**FESTE**

Not so, sir. I do care for something; but in my conscience,
sir, I do not care for you. If that be to care for
nothing, sir, I would it would make you invisible.



**VIOLA**

Art not thou the Lady Olivia's fool?



**FESTE**

No indeed, sir, the Lady Olivia has no folly. She
will keep no fool, sir, till she be married, and fools are as
like husbands as [pilcher][14]s are to herrings; the husband's
the bigger. I am indeed not her fool, but her corrupter
of words.

[14]: {{page.q}}=13328 "pilcher (n.) 1:  pilchard"


**VIOLA**

I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's.



**FESTE**

Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun, it
shines everywhere. I would be sorry, sir, but the fool
should be as [oft][15] with your master as with my mistress.
I think I saw your wisdom there?

[15]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.):  often"


**VIOLA**

Nay, an thou [pass][16] upon me, I'll no more with
thee. Hold, there's expenses for thee!
_She gives him a coin_

[16]: {{page.q}}=13329 "pass upon (v.):  [unclear meaning] jest at; impose on; pass judgement upon"


**FESTE**

Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send
thee a beard!



**VIOLA**

By my troth, I'll tell thee, I am almost [sick][17] for
one – (aside) though I would not have it grow on my
chin. Is thy lady within?

[17]: {{page.q}}=15762 "sick (adj.) 1:  longing, pining, avid"


**FESTE**

Would not a pair of these have bred, sir?



**VIOLA**

Yes, being kept together and put to [use][18].

[18]: {{page.q}}=6841 "use (n.) 7:  profit, interest, premium"


**FESTE**

I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to
bring a Cressida to this Troilus.



**VIOLA**

I understand you, sir; 'tis well begged.
_She gives another coin_



**FESTE**

The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but a
beggar – Cressida was a beggar. My lady is within, sir.
I will [conster][19] to them whence you come. Who you are
and what you would are out of my [welkin][20] – I might say
‘ element,’ but the word is overworn.
_Exit_

[19]: {{page.q}}=3654 "conster (v.) 1:  explain, inform, give an account"
[20]: {{page.q}}=8085 "welkin, out of one's:  out of one's element, none of one's business"


**VIOLA**

This fellow is wise enough to play the fool;
And to do that well [crave][21]s a kind of [wit][22].
He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
The [quality][23] of persons, and the time,
And, like the [haggard][25], [check][24] at every feather
That comes before his eye. This is a [practice][26]
As full of labour as a wise man's [art][27].
For folly that he wisely shows is [fit][28];
But wise men, [folly-fallen][29], quite [taint][30] their [wit][31].
_Enter Sir Toby and Sir Andrew_

[21]: {{page.q}}=2863 "crave (v.) 2:  need, demand, require"
[22]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[23]: {{page.q}}=13755 "quality (n.) 1:  nature, disposition, character"
[24]: {{page.q}}=4485 "check at (v.) 2:  [falconry] swerve to pounce on, turn towards, swoop at"
[25]: {{page.q}}=18621 "haggard (n.):  [falconry] wild hawk"
[26]: {{page.q}}=13356 "practice (n.) 5:  occupation, profession, line of work"
[27]: {{page.q}}=610 "art (n.) 1:  knowledge, learning, scholarship, science"
[28]: {{page.q}}=19837 "fit (adj.) 1:  suited, fitting, appropriate"
[29]: {{page.q}}=20710 "folly-fallen (adj.):  falling into folly, stooping to foolishness"
[30]: {{page.q}}=6340 "taint (v.) 4:  impair, harm, injure"
[31]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"


**SIR TOBY**

Save you, gentleman!



**VIOLA**

And you, sir!



**SIR ANDREW**

_Dieu vous garde, monsieur!_



**VIOLA**

_Et vous aussi; votre serviteur!_



**SIR ANDREW**

I hope, sir, you are, and I am yours.



**SIR TOBY**

Will you [encounter][32] the house? My niece is
desirous you should enter, if your [trade][33] be to her.

[32]: {{page.q}}=10164 "encounter (v.) 2:  approach, go to, move towards"
[33]: {{page.q}}=5480 "trade (n.) 2:  business, dealings"


**VIOLA**

I am bound to your niece, sir. I mean, she is the
[list][34] of my voyage.

[34]: {{page.q}}=19574 "list (n.) 4:  limit, objective"


**SIR TOBY**

[Taste][35] your legs, sir; put them to motion.

[35]: {{page.q}}=6341 "taste (v.) 1:  try out, test, put to the proof"


**VIOLA**

My legs do better [under-stand][36] me, sir, than I
understand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs.

[36]: {{page.q}}=6762 "understand (v.) 1:  stand under the force of [with pun on ‘comprehend’]"


**SIR TOBY**

I mean to go, sir, to enter.



**VIOLA**

I will answer you with gate and entrance.
_Enter Olivia and Maria_
But we are prevented. (To Olivia) Most excellent,
accomplished lady, the heavens rain odours on you!



**SIR ANDREW**

_aside_
That youth's a rare courtier. ‘ Rain
odours ’! Well!



**VIOLA**

My [matter][37] hath no voice, lady, but to your own
most [pregnant][38] and [vouchsafed][39] ear.

[37]: {{page.q}}=10513 "matter (n.) 4:  affair(s), business, real issue"
[38]: {{page.q}}=12243 "pregnant (adj.) 1:  well-disposed, ready, inclined, receptive"
[39]: {{page.q}}=7432 "vouchsafed (adj.):  well-bestowed, kindly granted"


**SIR ANDREW**

‘ Odours;’ ‘ pregnant;’ and ‘ vouchsafed.’
I'll get 'em all three all ready.



**OLIVIA**

Let the garden door be shut and leave me to my
hearing.
_Exeunt Sir Toby and Maria, Sir Andrew lingering before_
_he, too, leaves_
Give me your hand, sir.



**VIOLA**

My [duty][40], madam, and most humble service!

[40]: {{page.q}}=9216 "duty (n.) 2:  reverence, due respect, proper attitude"


**OLIVIA**

What is your name?



**VIOLA**

Cesario is your [servant][41]'s name, fair princess.

[41]: {{page.q}}=14133 "servant (n.) 1:  devotee, one who gives dedicated service, lover"


**OLIVIA**

My servant, sir? 'Twas never merry [world][42]
Since [lowly][44] [feigning][43] was called compliment.
Y'are servant to the Count Orsino, youth.

[42]: {{page.q}}=7955 "world (n.) 2:  times, life, state of affairs"
[43]: {{page.q}}=20711 "feigning (n.):  pretentiousness, posturing, courtly display"
[44]: {{page.q}}=19237 "lowly (adj.) 1:  humble, modest, submissive"


**VIOLA**

And he is yours, and his must needs be yours.
Your servant's servant is your servant, madam.



**OLIVIA**

For him, I think not on him. For his thoughts,
Would they were blanks rather than filled with me.



**VIOLA**

Madam, I come to whet your [gentle][45] thoughts
On his behalf –

[45]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6:  soft, tender, kind"


**OLIVIA**

O, by your leave, I pray you.
I [bade][46] you never speak again of him.
But would you undertake another [suit][47],
I had rather hear you to [solicit][48] that
Than music from the [sphere][49]s.

[46]: {{page.q}}=2049 "bid (v.), past form bade 1:  command, order, enjoin, tell"
[47]: {{page.q}}=14962 "suit (n.) 2:  wooing, courtship"
[48]: {{page.q}}=14022 "solicit (v.) 1:  urge, move, incite, prevail upon"
[49]: {{page.q}}=15747 "sphere (n.) 1:  celestial globe in which a heavenly body was thought to move, orbit"


**VIOLA**

Dear lady –



**OLIVIA**

Give me leave, beseech you. I did send,
After the last enchantment you did here,
A ring in chase of you. So did I [abuse][50]
Myself, my servant, and, I fear me, you.
Under your [hard][52] [construction][51] must I sit,
To force that on you in a shameful cunning
Which you knew none of yours. What might you think?
Have you not set mine honour at the [stake][53],
And baited it with all th' unmuzzled thoughts
That tyrannous heart can think? To one of your [receiving][54]
Enough is shown; a [cypress][55], not a bosom,
Hides my heart. So let me hear you speak.

[50]: {{page.q}}=879 "abuse (v.) 2:  misuse, maltreat, treat badly, wrong"
[51]: {{page.q}}=3655 "construction (n.) 2:  judgement, consideration, appraisal"
[52]: {{page.q}}=15276 "hard (adj.) 3:  painful, harrowing, tough"
[53]: {{page.q}}=15777 "stake, at the:  [bear-baiting] under attack; or [gambling]: at risk"
[54]: {{page.q}}=17251 "receiving (n.):  perception, awareness, discernment"
[55]: {{page.q}}=3315 "cypress (n.):  type of lightweight fabric, gauze cloth, crape material [when black, used in mourning]"


**VIOLA**

I pity you.


**OLIVIA**

That's a [degree][56] to love.

[56]: {{page.q}}=8701 "degree (n.) 3:  step, stage, rung"


**VIOLA**

No, not a [grize][57]; for 'tis a [vulgar][59] [proof][58]
That very [oft][60] we pity enemies.

[57]: {{page.q}}=17556 "grece, grise, grize (n.):  step, degree, grade"
[58]: {{page.q}}=12271 "proof (n.) 2:  experience, actual practice, tried knowledge"
[59]: {{page.q}}=7233 "vulgar (adj.) 5:  familiar, ordinary, everyday"
[60]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.):  often"


**OLIVIA**

Why, then, [methinks][61] 'tis time to smile again.
O world, how apt the poor are to be proud!
If one should be a prey, how much the better
To fall before the lion than the wolf!
_Clock strikes_
The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.
Be not afraid, good youth; I will not have you.
And yet, when [wit][62] and youth is come to harvest,
Your wife is [like][63] to reap a [proper][64] man.
There lies your way, due west.

[61]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[62]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[63]: {{page.q}}=19137 "like (adv.) 1:  likely, probable / probably"
[64]: {{page.q}}=12275 "proper (adj.) 1:  good-looking, handsome, comely"


**VIOLA**

Then westward ho!
Grace and good [disposition][66] [attend][65] your ladyship.
You'll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?

[65]: {{page.q}}=76 "attend (v.) 4:  accompany, follow closely, go with"
[66]: {{page.q}}=8438 "disposition (n.) 1:  composure, state of mind, temperament"


**OLIVIA**

Stay.
I prithee, tell me what thou think'st of me?



**VIOLA**

That you do think you are not what you are.



**OLIVIA**

If I think so, I think the same of you.



**VIOLA**

Then think you right; I am not what I am.



**OLIVIA**

I would you were as I would have you be.



**VIOLA**

Would it be better, madam, than I am?
I wish it might, for now I am your fool.



**OLIVIA**

_aside_
O, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful
In the contempt and anger of his lip!
A murderous guilt shows not itself more soon
Than love that would seem hid: love's night is noon.
(To Viola) Cesario, by the roses of the spring,
By maidhood, honour, truth, and everything,
I love thee so that, [maugre][67] all thy pride,
Nor [wit][68] nor reason can my passion hide.
Do not [extort][70] thy reasons from this [clause][69]:
For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause.
But rather reason thus with reason [fetter][71]:
Love sought, is good; but given unsought, is better.

[67]: {{page.q}}=10808 "maugre (prep.):  [pron: 'mawguh] in spite of"
[68]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[69]: {{page.q}}=3656 "clause (n.):  premise, assertion, statement"
[70]: {{page.q}}=10165 "extort (v.) 2:  extract with force, wring out"
[71]: {{page.q}}=20712 "fetter (v.):  restrain, overcome, suppress"


**VIOLA**

By innocence I swear, and by my youth,
I have one heart, one bosom, and one truth.
And that no woman has, nor never none
Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.
And so, adieu, good madam; never more
Will I my master's tears to you [deplore][72].

[72]: {{page.q}}=9535 "deplore (v.):  tell with grief, express with lamentation"


**OLIVIA**

Yet come again; for thou perhaps mayst move
That heart, which now abhors, to like his love.
_Exeunt_

