---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act IV - Scene III
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 22:00:56 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act4_scene3.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Sebastian_

**SEBASTIAN**

This is the air; that is the glorious sun;
This pearl she gave me, I do feel't and see't;
And though 'tis [wonder][2] that [enwrap][1]s me thus,
Yet 'tis not madness. Where's Antonio, then?
I could not find him at the Elephant.
Yet there he was; and there I found this [credit][3]
That he did [range][4] the town to seek me out.
His counsel now might do me golden service.
For though my soul disputes well with my sense
That this may be some error, but no madness,
Yet doth this [accident][5] and flood of fortune
So far exceed all [instance][7], all [discourse][6],
That I am ready to distrust mine eyes,
And wrangle with my reason that persuades me
To any other trust but that I am mad –
Or else the lady's mad; yet if 'twere so,
She could not [sway][8] her house, command her followers,
Take and give back affairs and their [dispatch][9],
With such a smooth, discreet, and [stable][10] bearing
As I perceive she does. There's something in't
That is [deceivable][11]. But here the lady comes.
_Enter Olivia and a Priest_

[1]: {{page.q}}=10169 "enwrap (v.):  absorb, engross, enfold"
[2]: {{page.q}}=7841 "wonder (n.) 1:  feeling of wonder, astonishment, marvelling"
[3]: {{page.q}}=3669 "credit (n.) 4:  report, news, story"
[4]: {{page.q}}=16561 "range (v.) 1:  wander freely, roam, rove"
[5]: {{page.q}}=710 "accident (n.) 1:  occurrence, event, happening"
[6]: {{page.q}}=8427 "discourse (n.) 2:  rationality, faculty of understanding"
[7]: {{page.q}}=4873 "instance (n.) 2:  illustration, example, case"
[8]: {{page.q}}=14117 "sway (v.) 1:  control, rule, direct, govern"
[9]: {{page.q}}=8907 "dispatch, despatch (n.) 6:  management, direction, supervision"
[10]: {{page.q}}=16492 "stable (adj.) 2:  steady, poised, self-possessed"
[11]: {{page.q}}=9243 "deceivable (adj.) 1:  deceptive, illusory"


**OLIVIA**

Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well,
Now go with me and with this holy man
Into the [chantry][13] [by][12]; there before him
And underneath that consecrated roof
Plight me the full [assurance][14] of your faith,
That my most [jealous][16] and too [doubtful][15] soul
May live at peace. He shall conceal it
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note;
What time we will our celebration keep
According to my [birth][17]. What do you say?

[12]: {{page.q}}=1078 "by (adv.) 1:  near by, close at hand"
[13]: {{page.q}}=4500 "chantry (n.):  small private chapel"
[14]: {{page.q}}=71 "assurance (n.) 2:  confirmation, pledge, guarantee"
[15]: {{page.q}}=8921 "doubtful (adj.) 1:  fearful, worried, apprehensive"
[16]: {{page.q}}=18952 "jealous (adj.) 3:  anxious, uneasy, worried [about]"
[17]: {{page.q}}=1065 "birth (n.) 1:  royal birth, noble ancestry"


**SEBASTIAN**

I'll follow this good man, and go with you;
And having sworn truth, ever will be true.



**OLIVIA**

Then lead the way, good father, and heavens so shine
That they may fairly [note][18] this act of mine!
_Exeunt_

[18]: {{page.q}}=11320 "note (v.) 1:  observe, pay attention [to], take special note [of]"
