---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act IV - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 21:44:41 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act4_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Maria and Feste_

**MARIA**

Nay, I prithee, put on this gown and this beard;
make him believe thou art Sir Topas the [curate][1]. Do it
quickly. I'll call Sir Toby the whilst.
_Exit_

[1]: {{page.q}}=3667 "curate (n.):  parish priest, parson"


**FESTE**

Well, I'll put it on and I will [dissemble][2] myself in't,
and I would I were the first that ever dissembled in such
a gown. I am not tall enough to [become][3] the [function][4]
well, nor lean enough to be thought a good student. But
to be [said][6] an honest man and a good [housekeeper][5] goes as
fairly as to say a [careful][7] man and a great scholar. The
[competitor][8]s enter.
_Enter Sir Toby and Maria_

[2]: {{page.q}}=9104 "dissemble (v.) 1:  disguise, cloak, give a deceptive appearance to"
[3]: {{page.q}}=1535 "become (v.) 3:  put a good front on, give a pleasing appearance to"
[4]: {{page.q}}=19896 "function (n.) 3:  office, occupation, calling"
[5]: {{page.q}}=18656 "housekeeper, house-keeper (n.) 1:  householder, hospitable person"
[6]: {{page.q}}=14180 "say (v.) 3:  proclaim, announce, declare"
[7]: {{page.q}}=4056 "careful (adj.) 3:  painstaking, serious-minded, attentive"
[8]: {{page.q}}=2984 "competitor (n.) 1:  partner, associate, colleague"


**SIR TOBY**

Jove bless thee, Master Parson!



**FESTE**

_Bonos dies_
Prague that never saw pen and ink very wittily said to
a niece of King Gorboduc: that that is, is. So I, being
Master Parson, am Master Parson; for what is ‘ that ’ but
‘ that ’? And ‘ is ’ but ‘ is ’?



**SIR TOBY**

To him, Sir Topas.



**FESTE**

What ho, I say! Peace in this prison!



**SIR TOBY**

The [knave][10] [counterfeit][9]s well; a good knave.

[9]: {{page.q}}=2883 "counterfeit (v.) 2:  pretend, feign, make believe"
[10]: {{page.q}}=15284 "knave (n.) 3:  boy, lad, fellow"


**MALVOLIO**

_within_
Who calls there?



**FESTE**

Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio
the lunatic.



**MALVOLIO**

Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to
my lady –



**FESTE**

Out, [hyperbolical][11] fiend, how vexest thou this man!
Talkest thou nothing but of ladies?

[11]: {{page.q}}=18657 "hyperbolical (adj.):  outrageous, immoderate, intemperate"


**SIR TOBY**

Well said, Master Parson.



**MALVOLIO**

Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged.
Good Sir Topas, do not think I am mad. They have laid
me here in hideous darkness –



**FESTE**

Fie, thou dishonest Satan! I call thee by the most
modest terms, for I am one of those [gentle][12] ones that will
use the devil himself with courtesy. Sayest thou that
house is dark?

[12]: {{page.q}}=17770 "gentle (adj.) 3:  refined, discriminating, sophisticated"


**MALVOLIO**

As hell, Sir Topas.



**FESTE**

Why, it hath bay windows transparent as [barricado][13]es,
and the [clerestories][14] toward the south – north
are as lustrous as ebony. And yet complainest thou of
obstruction!

[13]: {{page.q}}=1518 "barricado (n.):  barricade, rampart, barrier"
[14]: {{page.q}}=3668 "clerestory, clearstory (n.):  upper window [designed for letting in light]"


**MALVOLIO**

I am not mad, Sir Topas. I say to you, this
house is dark.



**FESTE**

Madman, thou errest. I say there is no darkness but
ignorance, in which thou art more [puzzled][15] than the
Egyptians in their fog.

[15]: {{page.q}}=12306 "puzzle (v.) 1:  bewilder, perplex, baffle"


**MALVOLIO**

I say this house is as dark as ignorance,
though ignorance were as dark as hell. And I say there
was never man thus [abuse][16]d. I am no more mad than you
are – make the trial of it in any [constant][17] question.

[16]: {{page.q}}=879 "abuse (v.) 2:  misuse, maltreat, treat badly, wrong"
[17]: {{page.q}}=1157 "constant (adj.) 2:  settled, resolved, decided"


**FESTE**

What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning
wildfowl?



**MALVOLIO**

That the soul of our grandam might [haply][18]
inhabit a bird.

[18]: {{page.q}}=15270 "haply (adv.):  perhaps, maybe, by chance, with luck"


**FESTE**

What thinkest thou of his opinion?



**MALVOLIO**

I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve
his opinion.



**FESTE**

[Fare][19] thee well; remain thou [still][20] in darkness. Thou
shalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras ere I will [allow][21] of
thy [wits][22], and fear to kill a woodcock lest thou dispossess
the soul of thy grandam. Fare thee well.

[19]: {{page.q}}=20910 "fare ... well: "
[20]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"
[21]: {{page.q}}=582 "allow (v.) 3:  acknowledge, grant, admit"
[22]: {{page.q}}=8049 "wits, also five wits:  faculties of the mind (common wit, imagination, fantasy, estimation, memory) or body (the five senses)"


**MALVOLIO**

Sir Topas, Sir Topas!



**SIR TOBY**

My most exquisite Sir Topas!



**FESTE**

Nay, I am for all [water][23]s.

[23]: {{page.q}}=8021 "water (n.) 2:  lustre, sheen, quality"


**MARIA**

Thou mightst have done this without thy beard
and gown; he sees thee not.



**SIR TOBY**

To him in thine own voice, and bring me word
how thou findest him. I would we were well rid of this
[knavery][25]. If he may be conveniently [deliver][24]ed, I would
he were, for I am now so far in offence with my niece
that I cannot pursue with any safety this [sport][26] the [upshot][27].
Come by and by to my chamber.
_Exeunt Sir Toby and Maria_

[24]: {{page.q}}=9219 "deliver (v.) 3:  free, release, liberate"
[25]: {{page.q}}=19056 "knavery (n.) 1:  roguish trick, rouguery, trickery"
[26]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[27]: {{page.q}}=6738 "upshot (n.) 1:  remaining stroke, final shot [as in archery, determining the result]"


**FESTE**

_sings_
Hey Robin, jolly Robin!
Tell me how thy lady does –



**MALVOLIO**

Fool!



**FESTE**

_sings_
My lady is unkind, perdy.



**MALVOLIO**

Fool!



**FESTE**

_sings_
Alas, why is she so?



**MALVOLIO**

Fool, I say!



**FESTE**

_sings_
She loves another –
Who calls, ha?



**MALVOLIO**

Good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at
my hand, help me to a candle, and pen, ink, and paper.
As I am a gentleman, I will live to be thankful to thee
for't.



**FESTE**

Master Malvolio?



**MALVOLIO**

Ay, good fool.



**FESTE**

Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five [wits][28]?

[28]: {{page.q}}=8049 "wits, also five wits:  faculties of the mind (common wit, imagination, fantasy, estimation, memory) or body (the five senses)"


**MALVOLIO**

Fool, there was never man so notoriously
abused. I am as well in my [wits][29], fool, as thou art.

[29]: {{page.q}}=8049 "wits, also five wits:  faculties of the mind (common wit, imagination, fantasy, estimation, memory) or body (the five senses)"


**FESTE**

But as well? Then you are mad indeed, if you be
no better in your [wits][30] than a fool.

[30]: {{page.q}}=8049 "wits, also five wits:  faculties of the mind (common wit, imagination, fantasy, estimation, memory) or body (the five senses)"


**MALVOLIO**

They have here [propertied][31] me; keep me in
darkness, send ministers to me – asses! – and do all they
can to [face][32] me out of my [wits][33].

[31]: {{page.q}}=13338 "property (v.) 1:  make a property of, treat as an object, exploit"
[32]: {{page.q}}=20717 "face (v.) 3:  bully, intimidate, turn"
[33]: {{page.q}}=8049 "wits, also five wits:  faculties of the mind (common wit, imagination, fantasy, estimation, memory) or body (the five senses)"


**FESTE**

[Advise][34] you what you say. The minister is here.
(In priest's voice) Malvolio, Malvolio, thy wits the
heavens restore! Endeavour thyself to sleep and leave
thy vain [bibble-babble][35].

[34]: {{page.q}}=871 "advise, avise (v.) 1:  consider, take thought, reflect"
[35]: {{page.q}}=1077 "bibble-babble (n.):  chatter, gabble, empty talk"


**MALVOLIO**

Sir Topas!



**FESTE**

Maintain no words with him, good fellow. (In own
voice) Who, I, sir? Not I, sir. God buy you, good Sir
_In priest's voice_
Topas! (In priest's voice) Marry, amen! (In own voice)
I will, sir, I will.



**MALVOLIO**

Fool! Fool! Fool, I say!



**FESTE**

Alas, sir, be patient. What say you sir? I am [shent][36]
for speaking to you.

[36]: {{page.q}}=13983 "shent (v.) 1:  [from obsolete verb ‘shend’] blamed, rebuked, reproached"


**MALVOLIO**

Good fool, help me to some light and some
paper. I tell thee, I am as well in my wits as any man in
Illyria.



**FESTE**

Well-a-day, that you were, sir!



**MALVOLIO**

By this hand, I am! Good fool, some ink,
paper, and light; and convey what I will set down to my
lady. It shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing
of letter did.



**FESTE**

I will help you to't. But tell me true, are you not
mad indeed, or do you but [counterfeit][37]?

[37]: {{page.q}}=2883 "counterfeit (v.) 2:  pretend, feign, make believe"


**MALVOLIO**

Believe me, I am not. I tell thee true.



**FESTE**

Nay, I'll ne'er believe a madman till I see his
brains. I will fetch you light, and paper, and ink.



**MALVOLIO**

Fool, I'll [requite][38] it in the highest degree. I
prithee, be gone.

[38]: {{page.q}}=16613 "requite (v.), past forms requit, requited 1:  reward, repay, recompense"


**FESTE**

_sings_
I am gone, sir, and [anon][39], sir,
I'll be with you again.
In a [trice][40], like to the old [Vice][41],
Your need to sustain.
Who with dagger of [lath][42], in his rage and his wrath,
Cries ‘ Ah ha!’ to the devil;
Like a mad lad – ‘ Pare thy nails, dad?
Adieu, goodman devil!’
_Exit_

[39]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1:  soon, shortly, presently"
[40]: {{page.q}}=5991 "trice (n.) 1:  brief period, moment, instant"
[41]: {{page.q}}=7221 "vice (n.) 1:  (usually capitalized) buffoon, stage jester"
[42]: {{page.q}}=19287 "lath (n.) 1:  thin wood"
