---
title: Twelfth Night
tagline: Act V - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 22:09:26 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Twelfth_Night_act5_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1601-1602
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Feste and Fabian_

**FABIAN**

Now, as thou lov'st me, let me see his letter.



**FESTE**

Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.



**FABIAN**

Anything!



**FESTE**

Do not desire to see this letter.



**FABIAN**

This is to give a dog, and in recompense desire
my dog again.
_Enter Orsino, Viola, Curio, and lords_



**ORSINO**

Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?



**FESTE**

Ay, sir, we are some of her [trappings][1].

[1]: {{page.q}}=6345 "trappings (n.):  ornaments, embellishments, bits and pieces"


**ORSINO**

I know thee well. How dost thou, my good
fellow?



**FESTE**

Truly, sir, the better for my foes, and the worse for
my friends.



**ORSINO**

Just the contrary: the better for thy friends.



**FESTE**

No, sir: the worse.



**ORSINO**

How can that be?



**FESTE**

Marry, sir, they praise me – and make an ass of me.
Now my foes tell me plainly, I am an ass; so that by my
foes, sir, I profit in the knowledge of myself, and by my
friends I am [abuse][2]d. So that, conclusions to be as
kisses, if your four negatives make your two affirmatives,
why then, the worse for my friends and the better
for my foes.

[2]: {{page.q}}=709 "abuse (v.) 1:  deceive, mislead, fool, cheat"


**ORSINO**

Why, this is excellent.



**FESTE**

By my troth, sir, no – though it please you to be
one of my friends.



**ORSINO**

Thou shalt not be the worse for me: there's gold.



**FESTE**

But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would
you could make it another.



**ORSINO**

O, you give me [ill][3] counsel!

[3]: {{page.q}}=4918 "ill (adj.) 1:  bad, adverse, unfavourable"


**FESTE**

Put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once,
and let your flesh and blood obey it.



**ORSINO**

Well, I will be so much a sinner to be a double-dealer;
there's another.



**FESTE**

_Primo_
_secundo_
_tertio_
saying is, the third pays for all; the [triplex][4], sir, is a good
[tripping][5] measure; or the bells of Saint Bennet, sir, may
put you in mind – one, two, three!

[4]: {{page.q}}=6346 "triplex (n.):  [music] triple time"
[5]: {{page.q}}=6637 "tripping (adj.):  light-footed, nimble"


**ORSINO**

You can fool no more money out of me at this
throw. If you will let your lady know I am here to speak
with her, and bring her along with you, it may awake my
bounty further.



**FESTE**

Marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come
again. I go, sir, but I would not have you to think that
my desire of having is the sin of covetousness. But as
you say, sir, let your bounty take a nap – I will awake it
[anon][6].
_Exit_
_Enter Antonio and Officers_

[6]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1:  soon, shortly, presently"


**VIOLA**

Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.



**ORSINO**

That face of his I do remember well.
Yet when I saw it last, it was [besmear][7]ed
As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war.
A [baubling][8] vessel was he captain of,
For shallow draught and bulk, [unprizable][9];
With which, such [scatheful][10] grapple did he make
With the most noble [bottom][11] of our fleet,
That [very][14] [envy][12] and the tongue of [loss][13]
Cried fame and honour on him. What's the matter?

[7]: {{page.q}}=2494 "besmear (v.) 1:  smear over, bedaub"
[8]: {{page.q}}=1714 "baubling, bawbling (adj.):  contemptible, trifling, piddling"
[9]: {{page.q}}=6884 "unprizable (adj.) 2:  worthless, of little value"
[10]: {{page.q}}=15824 "scatheful (adj.):  damaging, harmful, injurious"
[11]: {{page.q}}=1079 "bottom (n.) 6:  [nautical: keel, hull] ship, vessel"
[12]: {{page.q}}=9707 "envy (n.) 1:  malice, ill-will, enmity"
[13]: {{page.q}}=19576 "loss (n.) 3:  losing, defeat, overthrow"
[14]: {{page.q}}=7338 "very (adj.) 1:  [intensifying] thorough-going, absolute"


**FIRST OFFICER**

Orsino, this is that Antonio
_Phoenix_
_Tiger_
When your young nephew Titus lost his leg.
Here in the streets, [desperate][15] of [shame][16] and [state][17],
In private [brabble][18] did we apprehend him.

[15]: {{page.q}}=9244 "desperate (adj.) 3:  disregarding, careless, reckless"
[16]: {{page.q}}=14605 "shame (n.) 1:  disgrace, dishonour, affront"
[17]: {{page.q}}=5904 "state (n.) 1:  condition, circumstances, situation, state of affairs"
[18]: {{page.q}}=1080 "brabble (n.) 1:  brawl, noisy quarrel, fracas"


**VIOLA**

He did me kindness, sir, drew on my side,
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me.
I know not what 'twas, but [distraction][19].

[19]: {{page.q}}=8449 "distraction (n.) 2:  madness, derangement, insanity"


**ORSINO**

Notable pirate, thou salt-water thief,
What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies
Whom thou, in [term][22]s so [bloody][20] and so [dear][21],
Hast made thine enemies?

[20]: {{page.q}}=1075 "bloody (adj.) 1:  blood-thirsty, warlike, ferocious"
[21]: {{page.q}}=8792 "dear (adj.) 1:  dire, grievous, hard"
[22]: {{page.q}}=5447 "term (n.) 3:  state, condition, circumstance"


**ANTONIO**

Orsino, noble sir,
Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me.
Antonio never yet was thief or pirate;
Though, I confess, on [base][23] and [ground][24] enough,
Orsino's enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither.
That most [ingrateful][25] boy there by your side
From the [rude][26] sea's enraged and foamy mouth
Did I redeem; a [wrack][27] past hope he was.
His life I gave him, and did thereto add
My love without [retention][28] or restraint,
All his in dedication. For his sake
Did I expose myself – [pure][29] for his love –
Into the danger of this adverse town;
Drew to defend him when he was beset;
Where, being [apprehend][30]ed, his [false][31] cunning –
Not meaning to partake with me in danger –
Taught him to [face][32] me out of his acquaintance,
And grew a twenty years' [removed][33] thing
While one would [wink][34]; denied me mine own purse
Which I had [recommend][35]ed to his use
Not half an hour before.

[23]: {{page.q}}=1715 "base (n.) 1:  basis, foundation, cause"
[24]: {{page.q}}=17607 "ground (n.) 1:  reason, cause, source"
[25]: {{page.q}}=4971 "ingrateful (adj.) 1:  ungrateful, unappreciative"
[26]: {{page.q}}=16903 "rude (adj.) 3:  [of wind or water] stormy, turbulent, harsh"
[27]: {{page.q}}=7757 "wrack (n.) 2:  wreck, loss, shipwreck"
[28]: {{page.q}}=17257 "retention (n.) 2:  limit, restriction, holding back"
[29]: {{page.q}}=13340 "pure (adv.):  purely, solely, only"
[30]: {{page.q}}=332 "apprehend (v.) 1:  seize, arrest, lay hold of"
[31]: {{page.q}}=19780 "false (adj.) 1:  treacherous, traitorous, perfidious"
[32]: {{page.q}}=20718 "face (v.) 6:  exclude, expel; or: deny [to one's face]"
[33]: {{page.q}}=17258 "removed (adj.) 2:  estranged, remote, alienated"
[34]: {{page.q}}=8089 "wink (v.) 4:  blink"
[35]: {{page.q}}=16805 "recommend (v.) 1:  commit, commend, consign"


**VIOLA**

How can this be?



**ORSINO**

When came he to this town?



**ANTONIO**

Today, my lord; and for three months before
No interim, not a minute's vacancy,
Both day and night, did we keep company.
_Enter Olivia and attendants_



**ORSINO**

Here comes the Countess; now heaven walks on earth!
But for thee, fellow – fellow, thy words are madness.
Three months this youth hath tended upon me.
But more of that [anon][36]. Take him aside.

[36]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1:  soon, shortly, presently"


**OLIVIA**

What would my lord – but that he may not have –
Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable?
Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.



**VIOLA**

Madam?



**ORSINO**

Gracious Olivia –



**OLIVIA**

What do you say, Cesario? (To Orsino) Good, my lord.



**VIOLA**

My lord would speak; my duty hushes me.



**OLIVIA**

If it be [aught][37] to the old tune, my lord,
It is as [fat][38] and [fulsome][39] to mine ear
As howling after music.

[37]: {{page.q}}=84 "aught (n.):  anything, [with negative word] nothing"
[38]: {{page.q}}=20719 "fat (adj.) 2:  gross, heavy, dull"
[39]: {{page.q}}=20750 "fulsome (adj.) 1:  distasteful, nauseating, repulsive"


**ORSINO**

[Still][40] so cruel?

[40]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"


**OLIVIA**

Still so constant, lord.



**ORSINO**

What, to perverseness? You [uncivil][41] lady,
To whose [ingrate][42] and [unauspicious][43] altars
My soul the faithfull'st offerings hath breathed out
That e'er devotion tendered! What shall I do?

[41]: {{page.q}}=6648 "uncivil (adj.):  uncivilized, barbarous, unrefined"
[42]: {{page.q}}=4987 "ingrate (adj.):  ungrateful, unthankful, unappreciative"
[43]: {{page.q}}=7022 "unauspicious (adj.):  inauspicious, discouraging, unpromising"


**OLIVIA**

Even what it please my lord, that shall [become][44] him.

[44]: {{page.q}}=1432 "become (v.) 1:  be fitting, befit, be appropriate to"


**ORSINO**

Why should I not – had I the heart to do it –
Like to th' Egyptian thief at point of death
Kill what I love – a savage jealousy
That sometime savours nobly? But hear me this:
Since you to [non-regardance][45] cast my faith,
And that I partly know the instrument
That [screw][46]s me from my true place in your favour,
Live you the marble-breasted tyrant [still][47].
But this your [minion][48], whom I know you love,
And whom, by heaven, I swear, I [tender][49] dearly,
Him will I tear out of that cruel eye
Where he sits crowned in his master's [spite][50].
Come, boy, with me, my thoughts are ripe in mischief.
I'll sacrifice the lamb that I do love
To spite a raven's heart within a dove.

[45]: {{page.q}}=11504 "non-regardance (n.):  failure to respect, contempt, disdain"
[46]: {{page.q}}=15825 "screw (v.) 2:  wrench, force, wrest"
[47]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"
[48]: {{page.q}}=10625 "minion (n.) 1:  darling, favourite, select one"
[49]: {{page.q}}=5443 "tender (v.) 2:  feel concern for, hold dear, care for"
[50]: {{page.q}}=14578 "spite (n.) 1:  annoyance, vexation, irritation"


**VIOLA**

And I, most [jocund][52], [apt][51], and willingly
To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.

[51]: {{page.q}}=43 "apt (adj.) 1:  fit, ready, prepared"
[52]: {{page.q}}=18848 "jocund (adj.):  merry, joyful, cheerful"


**OLIVIA**

Where goes Cesario?



**VIOLA**

After him I love
More than I love these eyes, more than my life,
[More][53] by all mores than e'er I shall love [wife][54].
If I do feign, you witnesses above,
Punish my life, for [taint][55]ing of my love!

[53]: {{page.q}}=5845 "more (n.):  additional amount, extra quantity"
[54]: {{page.q}}=8115 "wife (n.):  woman"
[55]: {{page.q}}=6152 "taint (v.) 3:  disparage, denigrate, belittle"


**OLIVIA**

Ay me, [detest][57]ed! How am I [beguile][56]d!

[56]: {{page.q}}=1438 "beguile (v.) 1:  cheat, deceive, trick"
[57]: {{page.q}}=9245 "detest (v.) 1:  renounce, repudiate; or: hate, abhor"


**VIOLA**

Who does beguile you? Who does do you wrong?



**OLIVIA**

Hast thou forgot thyself? Is it so long?
Call forth the holy father!
_Exit an attendant_



**ORSINO**

Come, away!



**OLIVIA**

Whither, my lord? Cesario, husband, stay!



**ORSINO**

Husband?



**OLIVIA**

Ay, husband. Can he that deny?



**ORSINO**

Her husband, sirrah?



**VIOLA**

No, my lord, not I.



**OLIVIA**

Alas, it is the [baseness][58] of thy fear
That makes thee [strangle][60] thy [propriety][59].
Fear not, Cesario, take thy fortunes up.
Be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art
As great as that thou fear'st.
_Enter Priest_
O, welcome, Father.
Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence,
Here to unfold – though [lately][61] we intended
To keep in darkness what [occasion][62] now
Reveals before 'tis ripe – what thou dost know
Hath newly passed between this youth and me.

[58]: {{page.q}}=1551 "baseness (n.) 3:  cowardice, degenerateness, degradation"
[59]: {{page.q}}=13341 "propriety (n.) 2:  proper character, real identity"
[60]: {{page.q}}=5944 "strangle (v.):  quench, eclipse, stifle"
[61]: {{page.q}}=15366 "lately (adv.) 1:  recently, of late"
[62]: {{page.q}}=11829 "occasion (n.) 3:  need, want, requirement"


**PRIEST**

A contract of eternal bond of love,
Confirmed by mutual [joinder][63] of your hands,
[Attest][64]ed by the holy [close][65] of lips,
Strengthened by [interchangement][66] of your rings,
And all the ceremony of this compact
Sealed in my [function][67], by my testimony;
Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave
I have travelled but two hours.

[63]: {{page.q}}=18951 "joinder (n.):  joining, union, uniting"
[64]: {{page.q}}=598 "attest (v.) 1:  vouch for, be evidence of, testify to"
[65]: {{page.q}}=3512 "close (n.) 1:  union, uniting"
[66]: {{page.q}}=5233 "interchangement (n.):  interchange, exchange"
[67]: {{page.q}}=19896 "function (n.) 3:  office, occupation, calling"


**ORSINO**

O thou [dissembling][68] cub! What wilt thou be
When time hath sowed a [grizzle][70] on thy [case][69]?
Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow
That thine own [trip][71] shall be thine overthrow?
Farewell, and take her; but direct thy feet
Where thou and I henceforth may never meet.

[68]: {{page.q}}=8491 "dissembling (adj.):  deceitful, hypocritical, false"
[69]: {{page.q}}=4218 "case (n.) 5:  outer covering, surface appearance"
[70]: {{page.q}}=17994 "grizzle (n.):  sprinkling of grey hairs"
[71]: {{page.q}}=6373 "trip (n.):  [wrestling] foot movement which causes an opponent to fall"


**VIOLA**

My lord, I do protest –



**OLIVIA**

O, do not swear!
Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.
_Enter Sir Andrew_



**SIR ANDREW**

For the love of God, a surgeon! Send one
[presently][72] to Sir Toby.

[72]: {{page.q}}=12248 "presently (adv.) 1:  immediately, instantly, at once"


**OLIVIA**

What's the matter?



**SIR ANDREW**

He's broke my head [across][73], and he's given
Sir Toby a bloody [coxcomb][74] too. For the love of God,
your help! I had rather than forty pound I were at home.

[73]: {{page.q}}=797 "across (adv.) 2:  from side to side, all the way across"
[74]: {{page.q}}=3197 "coxcomb (n.) 1:  head"


**OLIVIA**

Who has done this, Sir Andrew?



**SIR ANDREW**

The Count's gentleman, one Cesario. We
took him for a coward, but he's the very devil
[incardinate][75].

[75]: {{page.q}}=5234 "incardinate (adj.):  malapropism for ‘incarnate’"


**ORSINO**

My gentleman, Cesario?



**SIR ANDREW**

'Od's lifelings, here he is! You broke my
head for nothing; and that that I did, I was set on to do't
by Sir Toby.



**VIOLA**

Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you.
You drew your sword upon me without cause,
But I [bespake][76] you [fair][77], and hurt you not.
_Enter Sir Toby and Feste_

[76]: {{page.q}}=1449 "bespeak (v.), past forms bespake, bespoke 4:  address, speak to"
[77]: {{page.q}}=20162 "fair (adv.) 1:  kindly, encouragingly, courteously"


**SIR ANDREW**

If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have
hurt me. I think you [set][78] nothing by a bloody coxcomb.
Here comes Sir Toby [halt][79]ing, you shall hear more; but
if he had not been in drink, he would have [tickle][80]d you
[othergates][81] than he did.

[78]: {{page.q}}=13970 "set (v.) 1:  value, rate, esteem"
[79]: {{page.q}}=15264 "halt (v.):  limp, proceed lamely"
[80]: {{page.q}}=5528 "tickle (v.) 2:  beat, flog, rain blows on"
[81]: {{page.q}}=11948 "othergates (adv.):  otherwise, differently, in another way"


**ORSINO**

How now, gentleman? How is't with you?



**SIR TOBY**

That's all one; he's hurt me, and there's the
end on't. (To Feste) Sot, didst see Dick Surgeon, sot?



**FESTE**

O, he's drunk, Sir Toby, an hour [agone][82]. His eyes
were [set][83] at eight i'the morning.

[82]: {{page.q}}=561 "agone (adv.):  ago, past"
[83]: {{page.q}}=15826 "set (adj.) 5:  fixed, rigid, closed"


**SIR TOBY**

Then he's a rogue and a [passy-measures][84] [pavin][85].
I hate a drunken rogue.

[84]: {{page.q}}=13342 "passy-measures (adj.):  dancing with slow pace"
[85]: {{page.q}}=13343 "pavin (n.):  type of stately dance, pavane"


**OLIVIA**

Away with him! Who hath made this havoc with
them?



**SIR ANDREW**

I'll help you, Sir Toby, because we'll be
[dress][86]ed together.

[86]: {{page.q}}=9067 "dress (v.) 4:  [of wounds] treat, minister to, care for"


**SIR TOBY**

Will you help? An asshead, and a [coxcomb][87],
and a [knave][89] – a thin-faced knave, a [gull][88]!

[87]: {{page.q}}=3051 "coxcomb (n.) 2:  fool's head, fool, simpleton"
[88]: {{page.q}}=17861 "gull (n.) 1:  dupe, fool, simpleton"
[89]: {{page.q}}=18989 "knave (n.) 1:  scoundrel, rascal, rogue"


**OLIVIA**

Get him to bed, and let his hurt be looked to.
_Exeunt Sir Toby and Sir Andrew,_
_helped by Feste and Fabian_
_Enter Sebastian_



**SEBASTIAN**

I am sorry, madam, I have hurt your kinsman.
But had it been the brother of my [blood][90]
I must have done no less, [wit][91]h wit and safety.
You throw a [strange][93] [regard][92] upon me; and by that
I do perceive it hath offended you.
Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows
We made each other but so late ago.

[90]: {{page.q}}=1777 "blood (n.) 6:  blood relationship, kinship"
[91]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[92]: {{page.q}}=17052 "regard (n.) 4:  look, glance, gaze"
[93]: {{page.q}}=15811 "strange (adj.) 7:  aloof, distant, reserved"


**ORSINO**

One face, one voice, one [[habit][95]][94], and two persons!
A natural [perspective][96], that is and is not.

[94]: {{page.q}}=15263 "habit (n.) 1:  dress, clothing, costume"
[95]: {{page.q}}=18258 "habit (n.) 3:  behaviour, bearing, demeanour"
[96]: {{page.q}}=12691 "perspective (n.):  picture in which perspective is altered so as to appear distorted unless seen from a particular angle"


**SEBASTIAN**

Antonio! O, my dear Antonio!
How have the hours racked and tortured me
Since I have lost thee!



**ANTONIO**

Sebastian, are you?



**SEBASTIAN**

[Fear][97]'st thou that, Antonio?

[97]: {{page.q}}=19803 "fear (v.) 3:  doubt, mistrust"


**ANTONIO**

How have you made division of yourself?
An apple cleft in two is not more twin
Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?



**OLIVIA**

Most wonderful!



**SEBASTIAN**

Do I stand there? I never had a brother;
Nor can there be that deity in my nature
Of here and everywhere. I had a sister
Whom the [blind][98] waves and surges have devoured.
Of charity, what kin are you to me?
What countryman? What name? What parentage?

[98]: {{page.q}}=2291 "blind (adj.) 3:  heedless, reckless, headstrong"


**VIOLA**

Of Messaline. Sebastian was my father.
Such a Sebastian was my brother too.
So went he [suit][99]ed to his watery tomb.
If spirits can assume both [form][100] and [suit][101]
You come to [fright][102] us.

[99]: {{page.q}}=14103 "suit (v.) 1:  dress, clothe, equip"
[100]: {{page.q}}=19871 "form (n.) 8:  physical appearance, outward appearance"
[101]: {{page.q}}=14285 "suit (n.) 4:  clothing, dress, garb"
[102]: {{page.q}}=19973 "fright (v.), past form frighted:  frighten, scare, terrify"


**SEBASTIAN**

A spirit I am indeed,
But am in that [dimension][103] [grossly][104] clad
Which from the womb I did [participate][105].
Were you a woman, as the rest goes [even][106],
I should my tears let fall upon your cheek,
And say, ‘ Thrice welcome, drowned Viola.’

[103]: {{page.q}}=9246 "dimension (n.) 1:  bodily form, physical frame"
[104]: {{page.q}}=17995 "grossly (adv.) 3:  materially, physically, with substance"
[105]: {{page.q}}=13344 "participate (v.):  take, receive, share in"
[106]: {{page.q}}=9842 "even (adj.) 6:  equal, alike, same"


**VIOLA**

My father had a mole upon his [brow][107].

[107]: {{page.q}}=2299 "brow (n.) 4:  forehead [often plural, referring to the two prominences of the forehead]"


**SEBASTIAN**

And so had mine.



**VIOLA**

And died that day when Viola from her birth
Had numbered thirteen years.



**SEBASTIAN**

O, that [record][108] is lively in my soul.
He finished indeed his mortal act
That day that made my sister thirteen years.

[108]: {{page.q}}=17259 "record (n.) 1:  recollection, memory"


**VIOLA**

If nothing [let][109]s to make us happy both
But this my masculine [usurped][110] attire,
Do not embrace me, till each circumstance
Of place, time, fortune, do [cohere][111] and [jump][112]
That I am Viola; which to confirm,
I'll bring you to a captain in this town
Where lie my maiden [weed][114]s; by whose [gentle][113] help
I was preserved to serve this noble Count.
All the occurrence of my fortune since
Hath been between this lady and this lord.

[109]: {{page.q}}=19118 "let (v.) 1:  hinder, prevent, stand in the way"
[110]: {{page.q}}=5760 "usurped (adj.):  false, counterfeit, disguising"
[111]: {{page.q}}=3670 "cohere (v.):  agree, accord, hold together"
[112]: {{page.q}}=18887 "jump (v.) 1:  agree, coincide, tally"
[113]: {{page.q}}=17496 "gentle (adj.) 2:  courteous, friendly, kind"
[114]: {{page.q}}=7564 "weed (n.) 1:  (plural) garments, dress, clothes"


**SEBASTIAN**

_to Olivia_
So comes it, lady, you have been mistook.
But nature to her [bias][115] drew in that.
You would have been contracted to a maid.
Nor are you therein, by my life, deceived:
You are betrothed both to a [maid][116] and man.

[115]: {{page.q}}=2054 "bias (n.) 1:  [weighting in a bowl causing it to run obliquely] inclination, tendency, leaning"
[116]: {{page.q}}=10548 "maid (n.) 2:  virgin, unmarried woman"


**ORSINO**

Be not amazed; right noble is his blood.
If this be so, as yet the [glass][117] seems true,
I shall have share in this most happy [wrack][118].
(To Viola) Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times
Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.

[117]: {{page.q}}=17507 "glass (n.) 1:  mirror, looking-glass"
[118]: {{page.q}}=7757 "wrack (n.) 2:  wreck, loss, shipwreck"


**VIOLA**

And all those sayings will I [overswear][119]
And those [swearing][120]s keep as true in soul
As doth that [orbed][122] [continent][121] the fire
That severs day from night.

[119]: {{page.q}}=11949 "overswear (v.):  swear over again"
[120]: {{page.q}}=14399 "swearing (n.):  act of swearing, moment of oath-taking"
[121]: {{page.q}}=3671 "continent (n.) 3:  globe, mass"
[122]: {{page.q}}=11617 "orbed (adj.):  rounded, orb-like, spherical"


**ORSINO**

Give me thy hand,
And let me see thee in thy woman's [weed][123]s.

[123]: {{page.q}}=7564 "weed (n.) 1:  (plural) garments, dress, clothes"


**VIOLA**

The Captain that did bring me first on shore
Hath my maid's garments. He, upon some action,
Is now in [durance][124] at Malvolio's [suit][125],
A gentleman and follower of my lady's.

[124]: {{page.q}}=9117 "durance (n.) 1:  confinement, imprisonment, incarceration"
[125]: {{page.q}}=14102 "suit (n.) 1:  formal request, entreaty, petition"


**OLIVIA**

He shall [enlarge][126] him; fetch Malvolio hither.
And yet, alas, now I [remember][127] me,
They say, poor gentleman, he's much [distract][128].
_Enter Feste with a letter, and Fabian_
A most extracting frenzy of mine own
From my [[remembrance][130]][129] clearly banished his.
(To Feste) How does he, sirrah?

[126]: {{page.q}}=9745 "enlarge (v.) 1:  release, set at large, discharge"
[127]: {{page.q}}=16893 "remember (v.) 1:  remind, bring to someone's mind"
[128]: {{page.q}}=8446 "distract (adj.) 1:  deranged, mad, mentally disturbed"
[129]: {{page.q}}=17000 "remembrance (n.) 3:  notice, paying attention"
[130]: {{page.q}}=17226 "remembrance (n.) 1:  memory, bringing to mind, recollection"


**FESTE**

Truly, madam, he holds Beelzebub at the [stave][131]s's
end as well as a man in his case may do. He's here writ a
letter to you. I should have given it you today morning.
But as a madman's epistles are no gospels, so it [skill][132]s not
much when they are delivered.

[131]: {{page.q}}=15827 "stave (n.):  staff, rod"
[132]: {{page.q}}=15076 "skill (v.):  matter, make a difference, be of importance"


**OLIVIA**

Open it, and read it.



**FESTE**

Look, then, to be well edified when the fool
[delivers][133] the madman.
_He reads frantically_
_By the Lord, madam_

[133]: {{page.q}}=9212 "deliver (v.) 1:  report [to], communicate [to], tell, describe"


**OLIVIA**

How now, art thou mad?



**FESTE**

No, madam; I do but read madness. An your
ladyship will have it as it ought to be, you must allow
_vox_



**OLIVIA**

Prithee, read i' thy right [wits][134].

[134]: {{page.q}}=8049 "wits, also five wits:  faculties of the mind (common wit, imagination, fantasy, estimation, memory) or body (the five senses)"


**FESTE**

So I do, madonna; but to read his right wits, is to
read thus. Therefore, [perpend][135], my princess, and give
ear.

[135]: {{page.q}}=12180 "perpend (v.):  consider, ponder, reflect"


**OLIVIA**

(snatching the letter and giving it to Fabian) Read
it you, sirrah.



**FABIAN**

_reads_
_By the Lord, madam, you wrong me, and the world shall_
_know it. Though you have put me into darkness and given_
_your drunken cousin rule over me, yet have I the benefit of_
_my senses as well as your ladyship. I have your own letter_
_that induced me to the semblance I put on; with the which_
_I doubt not but to do myself much right, or you much_
_shame. Think of me as you please, I leave my duty a little_
_unthought-of, and speak out of my injury. The madly-used_
_Malvolio._



**OLIVIA**

Did he write this?



**FESTE**

Ay, madam.



**ORSINO**

This savours not much of [distraction][136].

[136]: {{page.q}}=8449 "distraction (n.) 2:  madness, derangement, insanity"


**OLIVIA**

See him [deliver][137]ed, Fabian, bring him hither.
_Exit Fabian_
My lord, so please you, these things further thought on,
To think me as well a sister as a wife,
One day shall crown th' alliance on't, so please you,
Here at my house, and at my [proper][138] cost.

[137]: {{page.q}}=9219 "deliver (v.) 3:  free, release, liberate"
[138]: {{page.q}}=5874 "proper (adj.) 4:  personal, private, individual"


**ORSINO**

Madam, I am most [apt][139] t' embrace your offer.
(To Viola) Your master quits you; and for your service done him
So much against the mettle of your sex,
So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,
And since you called me master for so long,
Here is my hand; you shall from this time be
Your master's mistress.

[139]: {{page.q}}=43 "apt (adj.) 1:  fit, ready, prepared"


**OLIVIA**

A sister, you are she.
_Enter Malvolio and Fabian_



**ORSINO**

Is this the madman?



**OLIVIA**

Ay, my lord, this same.
How now, Malvolio?



**MALVOLIO**

Madam, you have done me wrong;
Notorious wrong.



**OLIVIA**

Have I, Malvolio? No!



**MALVOLIO**

Lady, you have; pray you, peruse that letter.
You must not now deny it is your hand.
Write from it if you can, in hand or phrase,
Or say 'tis not your seal, nor your [invention][140];
You can say none of this. Well, grant it then,
And tell me in the [modesty][142] of [honour][141],
Why you have given me such clear [light][143]s of favour?
Bade me come smiling and cross-gartered to you,
To put on yellow stockings, and to frown
Upon Sir Toby and the [light][144]er people?
And, acting this in an obedient hope,
Why have you suffered me to be imprisoned,
Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,
And made the most notorious [geck][145] and [gull][146]
That e'er [invention][147] played on? Tell me why?

[140]: {{page.q}}=5235 "invention (n.) 4:  composition, written exposition"
[141]: {{page.q}}=18193 "honour (n.) 2:  credit, good name, reputation"
[142]: {{page.q}}=10462 "modesty (n.) 2:  propriety, protocol, seemly behaviour"
[143]: {{page.q}}=19577 "light (n.) 3:  sign, signal, indication"
[144]: {{page.q}}=15367 "light (adj.) 6:  facile, frivolous, of no consequence"
[145]: {{page.q}}=17805 "geck (n.):  dupe, sucker, fool"
[146]: {{page.q}}=17861 "gull (n.) 1:  dupe, fool, simpleton"
[147]: {{page.q}}=5058 "invention (n.) 5:  plan, scheme, stratagem"


**OLIVIA**

Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing,
Though, I confess, much like the [character][148].
But out of question 'tis Maria's hand.
And now I do [bethink][149] me, it was she
First told me thou wast mad; then, camest in smiling,
And in such forms which here were [presuppose][150]d
Upon thee in the letter. Prithee, be [content][151].
This [practice][152] hath most [shrewdly][153] passed upon thee;
But when we know the grounds and authors of it,
Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge
Of thine own cause.

[148]: {{page.q}}=4285 "character (n.) 3:  handwriting, style of writing, lettering"
[149]: {{page.q}}=1455 "bethink (v.), past form bethought 1:  call to mind, think about, consider, reflect"
[150]: {{page.q}}=13345 "presuppose (v.):  suggest earlier, previously lay down"
[151]: {{page.q}}=2877 "content (adj.) 2:  contented, patient, accepting, undisturbed"
[152]: {{page.q}}=12233 "practice (n.) 2:  trickery, treachery"
[153]: {{page.q}}=15828 "shrewdly (adv.) 3:  maliciously, wickedly, mischievously"


**FABIAN**

Good madam, hear me speak;
And let no quarrel, nor no brawl to come,
[Taint][155] the [condition][154] of this present hour,
Which I have [wonder][156]ed at. In hope it shall not,
Most freely I confess, myself and Toby
Set this [device][157] against Malvolio here,
Upon some [stubborn][159] and [uncourteous][160] [part][158]s
We had [conceive][161]d against him. Maria writ
The letter at Sir Toby's great [importance][162],
In recompense whereof, he hath married her.
How with a [sportful][163] malice it was followed
May rather pluck on laughter than revenge,
If that the injuries be justly weighed
That have on both sides passed.

[154]: {{page.q}}=2899 "condition (n.) 3:  nature, state, circumstances"
[155]: {{page.q}}=6340 "taint (v.) 4:  impair, harm, injure"
[156]: {{page.q}}=8009 "wonder (v.) 1:  marvel [at], be astonished [at]"
[157]: {{page.q}}=8403 "device (n.) 1:  plot, stratagem, trick"
[158]: {{page.q}}=12150 "part (n.) 1:  quality, attribute, gift, accomplishment [of mind or body]"
[159]: {{page.q}}=15829 "stubborn (adj.) 3:  uncompromising, unyielding, obstinate"
[160]: {{page.q}}=7023 "uncourteous (adj.):  discourteous, unfriendly"
[161]: {{page.q}}=1190 "conceive (v.) 3:  imagine, fancy"
[162]: {{page.q}}=5236 "importance (n.) 2:  urgent request, urging, encouragement"
[163]: {{page.q}}=15579 "sportful (adj.) 2:  playful, frolicsome, wanton"


**OLIVIA**

Alas, poor fool! How have they [baffle][164]d thee!

[164]: {{page.q}}=1367 "baffle (v.) 2:  treat shamefully, expose to ridicule"


**FESTE**

Why, ‘ Some are born great, some achieve greatness,
and some have greatness thrown upon them.’ I
was one, sir, in this [interlude][165], one Sir Topas, sir – but
that's all one. ‘ By the Lord, fool, I am not mad!’ But do
you remember: ‘ Madam, why laugh you at such a
barren rascal, an you smile not, he's gagged ’? And thus
the [whirligig][166] of time brings in his revenges.

[165]: {{page.q}}=5048 "interlude, enterlude (n.):  short play, theatrical performance [staged to fill an interval]"
[166]: {{page.q}}=8090 "whirligig (n.):  spinning top, roundabout"


**MALVOLIO**

I'll be revenged on the whole pack of you!
_Exit_



**OLIVIA**

He hath been most notoriously [abuse][167]d.

[167]: {{page.q}}=879 "abuse (v.) 2:  misuse, maltreat, treat badly, wrong"


**ORSINO**

Pursue him and entreat him to a peace.
He hath not told us of the Captain yet.
When that is known, and golden time [convent][168]s,
A solemn [combination][169] shall be made
Of our dear souls. Meantime, sweet sister,
We will not part from hence. Cesario, come;
For so you shall be, while you are a man.
But when in other [habit][170]s you are seen –
Orsino's mistress, and his [fancy][171]'s queen!
_Exeunt all but Feste_

[168]: {{page.q}}=3475 "convent (v.) 2:  summon, call to appear, send for"
[169]: {{page.q}}=3796 "combination (n.):  alliance, league, treaty"
[170]: {{page.q}}=15263 "habit (n.) 1:  dress, clothing, costume"
[171]: {{page.q}}=20677 "fancy (n.) 1:  love, amorousness, infatuation"


**FESTE**

_sings_
When that I was and a little tiny boy,
With hey-ho, the wind and the rain;
A foolish thing was but a [toy][172],
For the rain it raineth every day.
But when I came to man's estate,
With hey-ho, the wind and the rain;
'Gainst [knave][173]s and thieves men shut their gate,
For the rain it raineth every day.
But when I came, alas, to wive,
With hey-ho, the wind and the rain;
By [swaggering][174] could I never thrive,
For the rain it raineth every day.
But when I came unto my beds,
With hey-ho, the wind and the rain;
With [tosspot][175]s still had drunken heads,
For the rain it raineth every day.
A great while ago the world began,
With hey-ho, the wind and the rain;
But that's all one, our play is done,
And we'll strive to please you every day.
_Exit_

[172]: {{page.q}}=5523 "toy (n.) 3:  trinket, trifle, trivial ornament"
[173]: {{page.q}}=18989 "knave (n.) 1:  scoundrel, rascal, rogue"
[174]: {{page.q}}=15872 "swaggering (n.):  blustering, bullying, quarrelling"
[175]: {{page.q}}=6348 "tosspot (n.):  drunkard, sot, tippler"
