---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act I - Scene III
category: play
author: shakespeare
source: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Plays.aspx?Ac=1&SC=3&IdPlay=5
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act1_scene3.html
layout: book_page
tag: [ shakespeare ]
creation: 1589-1593
date: 2014-03-28 05:05:00 +0800
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

Enter Antonio and Panthino

**ANTONIO**

Tell me, Panthino, what [sad][1] talk was that
Wherewith my brother held you in the cloister?

[1]: {{page.q}}=13906  "sad (adj.) 1: serious, grave, solemn"

**PANTHINO**

'Twas of his nephew Proteus, your son.


**ANTONIO**

Why, what of him?


**PANTHINO**

&nbsp               &nbsp He wondered that your lordship
Would [suffer][2] him to spend his youth at home,
While other men, of [slender][3] reputation,
[Put][5] forth their sons to seek [preferment][4] out:
Some to the wars to try their fortune there;
Some to [discover][6] islands far away;
Some to the studious universities.
For any or for all these exercises
He said that Proteus your son was [meet][7],
And did request me to [importune][8] you
To let him spend his time no more at home,
Which would be great [impeachment][10] to his [age][9],
In having known no travel in his youth.

[2]: {{page.q}}=14128  "suffer (v.) 1: allow, permit, let"
[3]: {{page.q}}=14011  "slender (adj.): slight, trifling, insignificant"
[4]: {{page.q}}=12846  "preferment (n.): advancement, promotion"
[5]: {{page.q}}=13197  "put forth (v.) 2: send abroad, send away"
[6]: {{page.q}}=9070  "discover (v.) 4: find, uncover, come upon"
[7]: {{page.q}}=10430  "meet (adj.) 1: fit, suitable, right, proper"
[8]: {{page.q}}=4833  "importune (v.) 1: urge, press"
[9]: {{page.q}}=527  "age (n.) 2: mature years, old age"
[10]: {{page.q}}=5172  "impeachment (n.) 2: discredit, reproach, detriment"

**ANTONIO**

Nor needest thou much importune me to that
Whereon this month I have been [hammer][11]ing.
I have considered well his loss of time,
And how he cannot be a [perfect][12] man,
Not being [tried][13] and tutored in the world.
Experience is by industry achieved,
And perfected by the swift course of time.
Then tell me, whither were I best to send him?

[11]: {{page.q}}=18485  "hammer (v.): think hard, deliberate, ponder"
[12]: {{page.q}}=12342  "perfect (adj.) 6: complete, totally accomplished, well-trained"
[13]: {{page.q}}=6310  "try (v.) 2: put to the test, test the goodness [of]"

**PANTHINO**

I think your lordship is not ignorant
How his companion, youthful Valentine,
[Attend][14]s the Emperor in his royal court.

[14]: {{page.q}}=913  "attend (v.) 2: serve, follow, wait [on/upon]"

**ANTONIO**

I know it well.


**PANTHINO**

'Twere good, I think, your lordship sent him thither.
There shall he practise [tilt][15]s and tournaments,
Hear sweet [discourse][17], [converse][16] with noblemen,
And be in [eye][19] of every [exercise][18]
Worthy his youth and nobleness of birth.

[15]: {{page.q}}=5600  "tilt (n.): lance-charge, joust, combat"
[16]: {{page.q}}=2730  "converse (v.): associate, keep company"
[17]: {{page.q}}=8673  "discourse (n.) 1: conversation, talk, chat"
[18]: {{page.q}}=9667  "exercise (n.) 2: manly sport, martial practice"
[19]: {{page.q}}=9930  "eye (n.) 1: sight, view, presence"

**ANTONIO**

I like thy counsel; well hast thou advised;
And that thou mayst perceive how well I like it,
The execution of it shall make known.
Even with the speediest [expedition][20]
I will [dispatch][21] him to the Emperor's court.

[20]: {{page.q}}=9938  "expedition (n.) 1: haste, speedy action, prompt dispatch"
[21]: {{page.q}}=9177  "dispatch, despatch (v.) 5: send away, send off"

**PANTHINO**

Tomorrow, may it please you, Don Alphonso
With other gentlemen of good esteem
Are journeying to [salute][22] the Emperor,
And to [commend][23] their service to his will.

[22]: {{page.q}}=15639  "salute (v.) 3: pay respects to, make a formal visit to"
[23]: {{page.q}}=2838  "commend (v.) 2: commit, entrust, hand over"

**ANTONIO**

Good company; with them shall Proteus go.

*Enter Proteus, reading a letter*

And [in good time][25]; now will we [break][24] with him.

[24]: {{page.q}}=1049  "break (v.) 5: reveal, disclose, impart"
[25]: {{page.q}}=6271  "time, in good 1: at the right moment"

**PROTEUS**

(aside)
Sweet love, sweet lines, sweet life!
Here is her hand, the agent of her heart;
Here is her oath for love, her honour's [pawn][26].
O, that our fathers would applaud our loves,
To seal our happiness with their consents!
O heavenly Julia!

[26]: {{page.q}}=12795  "pawn (n.): pledge, surety, forfeit"

**ANTONIO**

How now? What letter are you reading there?


**PROTEUS**

May't please your lordship, 'tis a word or two
Of [commendation][27]s sent from Valentine,
Delivered by a friend that came from him.

[27]: {{page.q}}=4622  "commendation (n.) 3: (plural) regards, compliments, greetings"

**ANTONIO**

Lend me the letter. Let me see what news.


**PROTEUS**

There is no news, my lord, but that he writes
How happily he lives, how well beloved,
And daily [graced][28] by the Emperor;
Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune.

[28]: {{page.q}}=17925  "graced (adj.) 2: honoured, favoured"

**ANTONIO**

And how stand you [affected][29] to his wish?

[29]: {{page.q}}=344  "affected (adj.) 1: disposed, inclined, minded"

**PROTEUS**

As one relying on your lordship's will,
And not depending on his friendly wish.


**ANTONIO**

My will is [something][30] [sort][31]ed with his wish.
[Muse][32] not that I thus suddenly proceed;
For what I will, I will, and there an end.
I am resolved that thou shalt spend some time
With Valentinus in the Emperor's court.
What maintenance he from his friends receives,
[Like][34] [exhibition][33] thou shalt have from me.
Tomorrow be in readiness to go.
[Excuse][35] it not, for I am [peremptory][36].

[30]: {{page.q}}=14025  "something (adv.) 1: somewhat, rather"
[31]: {{page.q}}=15586  "sort (v.) 5: correspond [to], be in agreement, conform [to]"
[32]: {{page.q}}=10587  "muse (v.) 1: wonder, be surprised"
[33]: {{page.q}}=9914  "exhibition (n.) 1: allowance, pension, maintenance"
[34]: {{page.q}}=19136  "like (adj.) 1: same, similar, alike, equal"
[35]: {{page.q}}=10087  "excuse (v.) 2: seek to decline, beg to get out of"
[36]: {{page.q}}=12590  "peremptory (adj.) 1: determined, resolved, absolutely decided"

**PROTEUS**

My lord, I cannot be so soon [provided][37].
Please you deliberate a day or two.

[37]: {{page.q}}=12820  "provided (adj.): prepared, ready, provided with necessities"

**ANTONIO**

[Look][38] what thou [want][39]est shall be sent after thee.
No more of [stay][40]; tomorrow thou must go.
Come on, Panthino; you shall be employed
To hasten on his expedition.
Exeunt Antonio and Panthino

[38]: {{page.q}}=19515  "look what (conj.): whatever"
[39]: {{page.q}}=7992  "want (v.) 4: require, demand, need"
[40]: {{page.q}}=14371  "stay (n.) 1: staying, remaining, continued presence"

**PROTEUS**

Thus have I shunned the fire for fear of burning,
And drenched me in the sea, where I am drowned.
I feared to show my father Julia's letter,
Lest he should take [exception][41]s to my love,
And with the [vantage][42] of mine own excuse
Hath he [except][43]ed most against my love.
O, how this spring of love resembleth
The uncertain glory of an April day,
Which now shows all the beauty of the sun,
And by and by a cloud takes all away.
Enter Panthino

[41]: {{page.q}}=10076  "exception (n.) 1: (often plural) objection, dislike, disapproval"
[42]: {{page.q}}=7253  "vantage (n.) 3: advantage, benefit, advancement, profit"
[43]: {{page.q}}=10088  "except, except against (v.) 2: object to, take exception to"

**PANTHINO**

Sir Proteus, your father calls for you.
He is in haste; therefore, I pray you go.


**PROTEUS**

Why, this it is; my heart accords thereto,
And yet a thousand times it answers, ‘ No.’
Exeunt
