---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act I - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
source: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Plays.aspx?Ac=1&SC=2&IdPlay=5
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act1_scene2.html
layout: book_page
tag: [ shakespeare ]
creation: 1589-1593
date: 2014-03-28 04:39:00 +0800
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

Enter Julia and Lucetta


**JULIA**

But say, Lucetta, now we are alone,
Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?


**LUCETTA**

Ay, madam, so you stumble not [unheedfully][1].

[1]: {{page.q}}=6976  "unheedfully (adv.): heedlessly, carelessly, inattentively"

**JULIA**

Of all the fair [resort][2] of gentlemen
That every day with [parle][3] encounter me,
In thy opinion which is worthiest love?

[2]: {{page.q}}=17169  "resort (n.) 3: crowd, gathering, company"
[3]: {{page.q}}=13195  "parle, parley (n.) 3: talk, conversation, discourse"

**LUCETTA**

Please you repeat their names, I'll show my mind
According to my shallow simple skill.


**JULIA**

What thinkest thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?


**LUCETTA**

As of a knight well-spoken, [neat][4], and fine;
But, were I you, he never should be mine.

[4]: {{page.q}}=11391  "neat (adj.) 1: posh, elegant, trim, refined"

**JULIA**

What thinkest thou of the rich Mercatio?


**LUCETTA**

Well of his wealth; but of himself, so so.


**JULIA**

What thinkest thou of the [gentle][5] Proteus?

[5]: {{page.q}}=17495  "gentle (adj.) 1: well-born, honourable, noble"

**LUCETTA**

Lord, lord, to see what folly reigns in us!


**JULIA**

How now, what means this [passion][6] at his name?

[6]: {{page.q}}=12161  "passion (n.) 5: passionate outburst, emotional passage"

**LUCETTA**

Pardon, dear madam; 'tis a [passing][7] shame
That I, unworthy body as I am,
Should [censure][8] thus on [lovely][9] gentlemen.

[7]: {{page.q}}=13188  "passing (adj.) 1: unsurpassed, extreme, pre-eminent"
[8]: {{page.q}}=4181  "censure (v.) 3: pass judgement on, condemn, pronounce sentence on"
[9]: {{page.q}}=15345  "lovely (adj.): loving, amorous"

**JULIA**

Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest?


**LUCETTA**

Then thus: of many good, I think him best.


**JULIA**

Your reason?


**LUCETTA**

I have no other but a woman's reason:
I think him so, because I think him so.


**JULIA**

And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him?


**LUCETTA**

Ay, if you thought your love not cast away.


**JULIA**

Why, he, of all the rest, hath never [move][10]d me.

[10]: {{page.q}}=10983  "move (v.) 9: woo, make a proposal to, make a move towards"

**LUCETTA**

Yet he, of all the rest, I think best loves ye.


**JULIA**

His little speaking shows his love but small.


**LUCETTA**

Fire that's closest kept burns most of all.


**JULIA**

They do not love that do not show their love.


**LUCETTA**

O, they love least that let men know their love.


**JULIA**

I would I knew his mind.


**LUCETTA**

Peruse this paper, madam.


**JULIA**

(reads)
To Julia. – Say, from whom?


**LUCETTA**

That the contents will show.


**JULIA**

Say, say, who gave it thee?


**LUCETTA**

Sir Valentine's page; and sent, I think, from Proteus.
He would have given it you; but I, being in the way,
Did in your name receive it; pardon the fault, I pray.


**JULIA**

Now, by my modesty, a goodly [broker][11]!
Dare you presume to harbour [wanton][12] lines?
To whisper and [conspire][13] against my youth?
Now, [trust][15] me, 'tis an [office][14] of great worth,
And you an officer fit for the [place][16].
There take the paper. See it be returned,
Or else return no more into my sight.

[11]: {{page.q}}=1817  "broker, broker-between (n.): go-between, intermediary, agent"
[12]: {{page.q}}=8273  "wanton (adj.) 2: casual, gentle"
[13]: {{page.q}}=1172  "conspire (v.): practise, contrive, plot"
[14]: {{page.q}}=11646  "office (n.) 2: role, position, place, function"
[15]: {{page.q}}=5736  "trust me: believe me"
[16]: {{page.q}}=13296  "place (n.) 1: position, post, office, rank"

**LUCETTA**

To plead for love deserves more fee than hate.


**JULIA**

Will ye be gone?


**LUCETTA**

              That you may ruminate.

Exit


**JULIA**

And yet I would I had [o'erlooked][17] the letter.
It were a shame to call her back again,
And pray her to a fault for which I [chid][18] her.
What ' fool is she, that knows I am a maid,
And would not force the letter to my view,
Since maids, in modesty, say no to that
Which they would have the profferer [construe][19] ay.
Fie, fie! How [wayward][20] is this foolish love,
That, like a [testy][21] babe, will scratch the nurse,
And [presently][22], all humbled, kiss the rod.
How churlishly I [chid][23] Lucetta hence,
When willingly I would have had her here.
How [angerly][24] I taught my [brow][25] to frown,
When inward joy enforced my heart to smile.
My penance is to call Lucetta back
And ask [remission][26] for my folly past.
What ho! Lucetta!
Enter Lucetta

[17]: {{page.q}}=11632  "overlook (v.) 1: look over, peruse, read through"
[18]: {{page.q}}=4299  "chide (v.), past form chid 1: scold, rebuke, reprove"
[19]: {{page.q}}=3501  "construe (v.) 2: take as, interpret as"
[20]: {{page.q}}=7756  "wayward (adj.) 1: perverse, unreasonable, awkward"
[21]: {{page.q}}=6250  "testy (adj.): irritable, peevish, short-tempered"
[22]: {{page.q}}=12248  "presently (adv.) 1: immediately, instantly, at once"
[23]: {{page.q}}=4464  "chide (v.), past form chid 4: brusquely command, drive [away] with harsh words"
[24]: {{page.q}}=403  "angerly (adv.): angrily, grouchily, testily"
[25]: {{page.q}}=1820  "brow (n.) 1: appearance, aspect, countenance"
[26]: {{page.q}}=17195  "remission (n.) 1: pardon, forgiveness"

**LUCETTA**

                 What would your ladyship?


**JULIA**

Is't near dinner-time?


**LUCETTA**

                  I would it were,
That you might [kill][27] your [[stomach][29]][28] on your meat,
And not upon your maid.
She drops and picks up the letter

[27]: {{page.q}}=19045  "kill (v.) 1: satisfy, allay, subdue, put an end to"
[28]: {{page.q}}=14147  "stomach (n.) 5: anger, resentment, vexation"
[29]: {{page.q}}=14150  "stomach (n.) 1: appetite, desire [for food]"

**JULIA**

What is't that you took up so gingerly?


**LUCETTA**

Nothing.


**JULIA**

Why didst thou stoop then?


**LUCETTA**

To take a paper up that I let fall.


**JULIA**

And is that paper nothing?


**LUCETTA**

Nothing concerning me.


**JULIA**

Then let it lie for those that it concerns.


**LUCETTA**

Madam, it will not lie where it [concern][30]s,
Unless it have a [false][31] interpreter.

[30]: {{page.q}}=3502  "concern (v.) 2: be of importance, be of concern"
[31]: {{page.q}}=20346  "false (adj.) 5: defective, weak, inadequate"

**JULIA**

Some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme.


**LUCETTA**

That I might sing it, madam, to a tune.
Give me a [note][32]; your ladyship can [set][33].

[32]: {{page.q}}=11302  "note (n.) 11: melody, tune, music, song"
[33]: {{page.q}}=15584  "set (v.) 8: compose a tune, write the music"

**JULIA**

As little by such [toy][34]s as may be possible.
Best sing it to the tune of ‘ Light o' love.’

[34]: {{page.q}}=5477  "toy (n.) 1: whim, caprice, trifling matter"

**LUCETTA**

It is too [[heavy][36]][35] for so light a tune.

[35]: {{page.q}}=18156  "heavy (adj.) 2: grave, serious, weighty"
[36]: {{page.q}}=18220  "heavy (adj.) 1: sorrowful, sad, gloomy"

**JULIA**

Heavy? [Belike][37] it hath some [burden][38] then?

[37]: {{page.q}}=1442  "belike (adv.): probably, presumably, perhaps, so it seems"
[38]: {{page.q}}=1826  "burden, burthen (n.) 1: refrain, chorus"

**LUCETTA**

Ay, and melodious were it, would you sing it.


**JULIA**

And why not you?


**LUCETTA**

                  I cannot reach so high.


**JULIA**

Let's see your song. How now, [minion][39]!
Julia snatches at the letter which Lucetta retains

[39]: {{page.q}}=10629  "minion (n.) 2: hussy, jade, minx"

**LUCETTA**

Keep [tune][40] there still, so you will sing it out;
And yet [methinks][41] I do not like this tune.
Julia seizes the letter

[40]: {{page.q}}=6020  "tune (n.) 1: state of mind, mood"
[41]: {{page.q}}=10439  "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.): it seems /seemed to me"

**JULIA**

You do not?


**LUCETTA**

                  No, madam; it is too [sharp][42].

[42]: {{page.q}}=16423  "sharp (adj.) 3: high-pitched, shrill, out-of-tune"


**JULIA**

You, minion, are too saucy.


**LUCETTA**

Nay, now you are too flat;
And mar the concord with too harsh a [descant][43].
There [want][45]eth but a [mean][44] to fill your song.

[43]: {{page.q}}=8570  "descant (n.): melodious accompaniment, tuneful variation"
[44]: {{page.q}}=10851  "mean (n.) 11: middle-part singer, tenor, alto"
[45]: {{page.q}}=7539  "want (v.) 1: lack, need, be without"

**JULIA**

The mean is drowned with your unruly bass.


**LUCETTA**

Indeed, I [bid][46] the bass for Proteus.

[46]: {{page.q}}=2249  "bid the base / bass: challenge someone to a chase [from ‘prisoner's base’, a boy's chasing game]"

**JULIA**

This babble shall not henceforth trouble me.
Here is a [coil][47] with [protestation][48].
She tears the letter
Go, get you gone, and let the papers lie.
You would be fingering them, to anger me.

[47]: {{page.q}}=3613  "coil (n.): turmoil, disturbance, fuss"
[48]: {{page.q}}=13196  "protestation (n.): solemn declaration, affirmation"

**LUCETTA**

(aside)
She makes it [strange][49], but she would be best pleased
To be so angered with another letter.

Exit

[49]: {{page.q}}=15585  "strange, make it: affect indifference, pretend to be unwilling"

**JULIA**

Nay, would I were so angered with the same!
O, hateful hands, to tear such loving words.
[Injurious][50] wasps, to feed on such sweet honey,
And kill the bees that yield it with your stings.
I'll kiss each [several][51] paper for amends.
Look, here is writ, kind Julia. Unkind Julia,
As in revenge of thy ingratitude,
I throw thy name against the bruising stones,
Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.
And here is writ, love-wounded Proteus.
Poor wounded name, my [bosom][52], as a bed,
Shall lodge thee till thy wound be [throughly][53] healed;
And thus I [search][54] it with a sovereign kiss.
But twice or thrice was Proteus written down.
Be calm, good wind, blow not a word away
Till I have found each letter in the letter,
Except mine own name. That some whirlwind bear
Unto a [ragged][55], fearful, hanging rock,
And throw it thence into the raging sea.
Lo, here in one line is his name twice writ:
Poor, forlorn Proteus, passionate Proteus,
To the sweet Julia. That I'll tear away;
And yet I will not, sith so prettily
He couples it to his complaining names.
Thus will I fold them one upon another.
Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.
Enter Lucetta

[50]: {{page.q}}=5091  "injurious (adj.) 1: causing injury, harmful, offending, unjust"
[51]: {{page.q}}=13898  "several (adj.) 1: separate, different, distinct"
[52]: {{page.q}}=2598  "bosom (n.) 8: pocket on the front of a woman's dress"
[53]: {{page.q}}=5460  "throughly (adv.): thoroughly, fully, completely"
[54]: {{page.q}}=14221  "search (v.) 1: probe, explore, examine"
[55]: {{page.q}}=16707  "ragged (adj.) 3: rough-hewn, dilapidated, rugged"

**LUCETTA**

Madam,
Dinner is ready, and your father stays.


**JULIA**

Well, let us go.


**LUCETTA**

What, shall these papers lie like tell-tales here?


**JULIA**

If you [respect][56] them, best to take them up.

[56]: {{page.q}}=17170  "respect (v.) 3: value, have regard for, prize"

**LUCETTA**

Nay, I was [take][57]n up for laying them down.
Yet here they shall not lie for catching cold.
She picks up the pieces of the letter

[57]: {{page.q}}=6030  "take up (v.) 9: rebuke, scold, reprimand"

**JULIA**

I see you have a month's [mind][58] to them.

[58]: {{page.q}}=10826  "mind (n.) 1: inclination, desire, wish"


**LUCETTA**

Ay, madam, you may say what sights you see;
I see things too, although you [judge][59] I [wink][60].

[59]: {{page.q}}=18929  "judge (v.) 1: suppose, consider, think"
[60]: {{page.q}}=7633  "wink (v.) 1: shut one's eyes"

**JULIA**

Come, come, will't please you go?
Exeunt
