---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act II - Scene IV
category: play
author: shakespeare
source: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Plays.aspx?Ac=2&SC=4&IdPlay=5
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act2_scene4.html
layout: book_page
tag: [ shakespeare ]
creation: 1589-1593
date: 2014-03-28 09:03:00 +0800
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

Enter Silvia, Thurio, Valentine, and Speed


**SILVIA**

Servant!


**VALENTINE**

Mistress?


**SPEED**

(to Valentine)
Master, Sir Thurio frowns on you.


**VALENTINE**

(to Speed)
Ay, boy; it's for love.


**SPEED**

(to Valentine)
Not of you.


**VALENTINE**

(to Speed)
Of my mistress, then.


**SPEED**

(to Valentine)
'Twere good you [knocked][1] him.

Exit

[1]: {{page.q}}=19046  "knock (v.): strike, beat, hit"

**SILVIA**

Servant, you are [sad][2].

[2]: {{page.q}}=13906  "sad (adj.) 1: serious, grave, solemn"

**VALENTINE**

Indeed, madam, I seem so.


**THURIO**

Seem you that you are not?


**VALENTINE**

[Haply][3] I do.

[3]: {{page.q}}=15270  "haply (adv.): perhaps, maybe, by chance, with luck"

**THURIO**

So do [counterfeit][4]s.

[4]: {{page.q}}=3405  "counterfeit (n.) 2: impostor, pretender, sham"

**VALENTINE**

So do you.


**THURIO**

What seem I that I am not?


**VALENTINE**

Wise.


**THURIO**

What instance of the contrary?


**VALENTINE**

Your folly.


**THURIO**

And how [quote][5] you my folly?

[5]: {{page.q}}=13749  "quote (v.) 1: closely observe, note, examine"

**VALENTINE**

I quote it in your [jerkin][6].

[6]: {{page.q}}=18928  "jerkin (n.): male upper garment, close-fitting jacket [often made of leather]"

**THURIO**

My jerkin is a doublet.


**VALENTINE**

Well, then, I'll double your folly.


**THURIO**

How?


**SILVIA**

What, angry, Sir Thurio? Do you change colour?


**VALENTINE**

Give him leave, madam; he is a kind of
chameleon.


**THURIO**

That hath more mind to feed on your blood than
live in your air.


**VALENTINE**

You have [said][7], sir.

[7]: {{page.q}}=16376  "say (v.) 6: speak the truth, speak to the point"

**THURIO**

Ay, sir, and done too, for this time.


**VALENTINE**

I know it well, sir; you always end ere you
begin.


**SILVIA**

A fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly
shot off.


**VALENTINE**

'Tis indeed, madam. We thank the giver.


**SILVIA**

Who is that, servant?


**VALENTINE**

Yourself, sweet lady; for you gave the fire.
Sir Thurio borrows his [wit][8] from your ladyship's looks,
and spends what he borrows [kindly][9] in your company.

[8]: {{page.q}}=7583  "wit (n.) 1: intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[9]: {{page.q}}=15307  "kindly (adv.) 1: in accordance with human nature, expressing normal humanity"

**THURIO**

Sir, if you spend word for word with me, I shall
make your wit bankrupt.


**VALENTINE**

I know it well, sir; you have an exchequer of
words, and, I think, no other treasure to give your followers;
for it appears by their [bare][10] [liveries][11], that they live
by your [bare][12] words.
Enter the Duke of Milan

[10]: {{page.q}}=1470  "bare (adj.) 2: threadbare, shabby, ragged"
[11]: {{page.q}}=19153  "livery (n.) 1: uniform, costume, special clothing"
[12]: {{page.q}}=1408  "bare (adj.) 1: mere, simple"

**SILVIA**

No more, gentlemen, no more! Here comes my
father.


**DUKE**

Now, daughter Silvia, you are [hard][14] [beset][13].
Sir Valentine, your father is in good health.
What say you to a letter from your friends
Of much good news?

[13]: {{page.q}}=1680  "beset (v.): set upon, assail, besiege"
[14]: {{page.q}}=15262  "hard (adv.) 2: earnestly, vigorously, energetically"

**VALENTINE**

                  My lord, I will be thankful
To any [happy][15] messenger from thence.

[15]: {{page.q}}=15273  "happy (adj.) 2: opportune, appropriate, propitious, favourable"

**DUKE**

Know ye Don Antonio, your countryman?


**VALENTINE**

Ay, my good lord, I know the gentleman
To be of worth, and worthy [estimation][16],
And not without [desert][17] so well reputed.

[16]: {{page.q}}=9657  "estimation (n.) 1: esteem, respect, reputation"
[17]: {{page.q}}=8678  "desert, desart (n.) 4: cause, deserving, warrant"

**DUKE**

Hath he not a son?


**VALENTINE**

Ay, my good lord, a son that well deserves
The honour and regard of such a father.


**DUKE**

You know him well?


**VALENTINE**

I know him as myself; for from our infancy
We have [converse][18]d and spent our hours together;
And though myself have been an idle truant,
[Omit][19]ting the sweet benefit of time
To clothe mine age with angel-like perfection,
Yet hath Sir Proteus – for that's his name –
Made use and fair [advantage][20] of his days:
His years but young, but his experience old;
His head [unmellowed][22], but his judgement [ripe][21];
And in a word, for far behind his worth
Comes all the praises that I now bestow,
He is [complete][23] in [feature][24] and in mind,
With all good grace to grace a gentleman.

[18]: {{page.q}}=2730  "converse (v.): associate, keep company"
[19]: {{page.q}}=11735  "omit (v.): neglect, disregard, forget about"
[20]: {{page.q}}=608  "advantage (n.) 4: interest, bonus, addition"
[21]: {{page.q}}=17191  "ripe (adj.) 5: mature, sophisticated, refined"
[22]: {{page.q}}=6978  "unmellowed (adj.): not matured in age, showing no grey hairs"
[23]: {{page.q}}=1189  "complete, compleat (adj.) 1: accomplished, consummate, thorough"
[24]: {{page.q}}=19806  "feature (n.): physical appearance, bodily shape, looks"

**DUKE**

[Beshrew][25] me, sir, but if he make this good,
He is as worthy for an empress' love
As [meet][26] to be an emperor's counsellor.
Well, sir, this gentleman is come to me
With commendation from great potentates,
And here he means to spend his time awhile.
I think 'tis no unwelcome news to you.

[25]: {{page.q}}=1534  "beshrew, 'shrew (v.) 1: curse, devil take, evil befall"
[26]: {{page.q}}=10430  "meet (adj.) 1: fit, suitable, right, proper"

**VALENTINE**

Should I have wished a thing, it had been he.


**DUKE**

Welcome him then according to his worth.
Silvia, I speak to you, and you, Sir Thurio;
For Valentine, I need not [cite][27] him to it.
I will send him hither to you [presently][28].

Exit

[27]: {{page.q}}=1176  "cite (v.) 1: urge, call on, arouse, summon"
[28]: {{page.q}}=13077  "presently (adv.) 2: after a short time, soon, before long"

**VALENTINE**

This is the gentleman I told your ladyship
Had come along with me but that his mistress
Did hold his eyes locked in her crystal looks.


**SILVIA**

[Belike][29] that now she hath [enfranchise][30]d them
Upon some other [pawn][32] for [fealty][31].

[29]: {{page.q}}=1442  "belike (adv.): probably, presumably, perhaps, so it seems"
[30]: {{page.q}}=9803  "enfranchise (v.): set free, liberate"
[31]: {{page.q}}=19767  "fealty (n.): [feudal obligation of obedience] duty of loyalty, allegiance, fidelity"
[32]: {{page.q}}=12795  "pawn (n.): pledge, surety, forfeit"

**VALENTINE**

Nay, sure, I think she holds them prisoners still.


**SILVIA**

Nay, then, he should be blind; and, being blind,
How could he see his way to seek out you?


**VALENTINE**

Why, lady, Love hath twenty pair of eyes.


**THURIO**

They say that Love hath not an eye at all.


**VALENTINE**

To see such lovers, Thurio, as yourself;
Upon a [homely][33] object Love can [wink][34].
Enter Proteus

[33]: {{page.q}}=18304  "homely (adj.) 2: plain-looking, unattractive, ugly"
[34]: {{page.q}}=7633  "wink (v.) 1: shut one's eyes"

**SILVIA**

Have done, have done; here comes the gentleman.


**VALENTINE**

Welcome, dear Proteus! Mistress, I beseech you
Confirm his welcome with some special favour.


**SILVIA**

His worth is [warrant][35] for his welcome hither,
If this be he you [oft][36] have wished to hear from.

[35]: {{page.q}}=7712  "warrant (n.) 2: licence, sanction, authorization"
[36]: {{page.q}}=11606  "oft (adv.): often"

**VALENTINE**

Mistress, it is. Sweet lady, [entertain][37] him
To be my fellow-servant to your ladyship.

[37]: {{page.q}}=9927  "entertain (v.) 5: hire, employ, maintain, take into service"

**SILVIA**

Too low a mistress for so high a [servant][38].

[38]: {{page.q}}=14133  "servant (n.) 1: devotee, one who gives dedicated service, lover"

**PROTEUS**

Not so, sweet lady; but too mean a servant
To have a look of such a worthy mistress.


**VALENTINE**

Leave off [discourse][39] of disability;
Sweet lady, entertain him for your servant.

[39]: {{page.q}}=8673  "discourse (n.) 1: conversation, talk, chat"

**PROTEUS**

My duty will I boast of, nothing else.


**SILVIA**

And duty never yet did [want][41] his [meed][40].
Servant, you are welcome to a worthless mistress.

[40]: {{page.q}}=10428  "meed (n.) 1: reward, prize, recompense"
[41]: {{page.q}}=7539  "want (v.) 1: lack, need, be without"

**PROTEUS**

I'll [die][42] on him that says so but yourself.

[42]: {{page.q}}=9152  "die on (v.): die fighting, challenge in mortal combat"

**SILVIA**

That you are welcome?


**PROTEUS**

                  That you are worthless.
Enter a Servant


**SERVANT**

Madam, my lord your father would speak with you.


**SILVIA**

I wait upon his pleasure. (Exit Servant) Come, Sir Thurio,
Go with me. Once more, new servant, welcome.
I'll leave you to confer of home affairs;
When you have done, we look to hear from you.


**PROTEUS**

We'll both [attend][43] upon your ladyship.
Exeunt Silvia and Thurio

[43]: {{page.q}}=913  "attend (v.) 2: serve, follow, wait [on/upon]"

**VALENTINE**

Now, tell me, how do all from whence you came?


**PROTEUS**

Your friends are well, and have them much [commend][44]ed.

[44]: {{page.q}}=2672  "commend (v.) 1: convey greetings, present kind regards"

**VALENTINE**

And how do yours?


**PROTEUS**

                  I left them all in health.


**VALENTINE**

How does your lady, and how thrives your love?


**PROTEUS**

My tales of love were [wont][45] to weary you;
I know you joy not in a love discourse.

[45]: {{page.q}}=7592  "wont (v.): be accustomed, used [to], be in the habit of"

**VALENTINE**

Ay, Proteus, but that life is altered now;
I have done penance for [contemn][46]ing Love,
Whose high imperious thoughts have punished me
With bitter fasts, with penitential groans,
With [nightly][47] tears, and daily heart-sore sighs;
For, in revenge of my contempt of love,
Love hath chased sleep from my [enthralled][48] eyes,
And made them [watcher][49]s of mine own heart's sorrow.
O [gentle][50] Proteus, Love's a mighty lord,
And hath so humbled me as I confess
There is no woe to his correction,
Nor to his service no such joy on earth.
Now no [discourse][51], except it be of love;
Now can I break my fast, dine, [sup][52], and sleep,
Upon the very naked name of love.

[46]: {{page.q}}=2842  "contemn (v.): despise, scorn, treat with contempt"
[47]: {{page.q}}=21246  "nightly (adj.) 1: of the night, active at night"
[48]: {{page.q}}=9795  "enthralled (adj.): enslaved, made captive"
[49]: {{page.q}}=7852  "watcher (n.): one who stays wide-awake"
[50]: {{page.q}}=17496  "gentle (adj.) 2: courteous, friendly, kind"
[51]: {{page.q}}=8673  "discourse (n.) 1: conversation, talk, chat"
[52]: {{page.q}}=14508  "sup (v.) 1: have supper"

**PROTEUS**

Enough; I read your fortune in your eye.
Was this the idol that you worship so?


**VALENTINE**

Even she; and is she not a heavenly saint?


**PROTEUS**

No; but she is an earthly paragon.


**VALENTINE**

Call her divine.


**PROTEUS**

                  I will not flatter her.


**VALENTINE**

O, flatter me; for love delights in praises.


**PROTEUS**

When I was sick, you gave me bitter pills,
And I must minister [the][53] like to you.

[53]: {{page.q}}=21272  "like, the: the same"

**VALENTINE**

Then speak the truth by her; if not divine,
Yet let her be a [principality][54],
Sovereign to all the creatures on the earth.

[54]: {{page.q}}=13203  "principality (n.): spiritual being very high in the hierarchy of angels"

**PROTEUS**

Except my mistress.


**VALENTINE**

                  Sweet, except not any,
[Except][55] thou wilt except against my love.

[55]: {{page.q}}=9868  "except, except against (v.) 1: take exception to, object to, repudiate"

**PROTEUS**

Have I not reason to prefer mine own?


**VALENTINE**

And I will help thee to [prefer][56] her too:
She shall be dignified with this high honour –
To bear my lady's train, lest the [base][57] earth
Should from her [vesture][58] chance to steal a kiss,
And, of so great a favour growing proud,
Disdain to [root][59] the summer-swelling flower
And make rough winter everlastingly.

[56]: {{page.q}}=12338  "prefer (v.) 1: promote, advance, recommend"
[57]: {{page.q}}=1581  "base (adj.) 5: low-lying, lowland"
[58]: {{page.q}}=7279  "vesture (n.): garment, clothing, garb, costume"
[59]: {{page.q}}=17171  "root (v.) 1: provide with roots, receive the roots of"

**PROTEUS**

Why, Valentine, what [braggardism][60] is this?

[60]: {{page.q}}=2250  "braggardism, braggartism (n.): bragging, boasting"

**VALENTINE**

Pardon me, Proteus, all I [can][61] is nothing
To her, whose [worth][62] makes other worthies nothing;
She is [alone][63].

[61]: {{page.q}}=3922  "can (v.) 1: be skilled [in], have ability [in]"
[62]: {{page.q}}=8032  "worthy (n.): thing of worth, distinction, excellence"
[63]: {{page.q}}=558  "alone (adj.): unique, matchless, having no equal"

**PROTEUS**

                  Then let her alone.


**VALENTINE**

Not for the world! Why, man, she is mine own;
And I as rich in having such a jewel
As twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl,
The water nectar, and the rocks pure gold.
Forgive me, that I do not [dream][64] on thee,
Because thou seest me dote upon my love.
My foolish rival, that her father likes
Only for his possessions are so huge,
Is gone with her along; and I must after,
For love, thou knowest, is full of jealousy.

[64]: {{page.q}}=9153  "dream (v.): concentrate, focus attention"

**PROTEUS**

But she loves you?


**VALENTINE**

Ay, and we are betrothed; nay more, our marriage-hour,
With all the cunning manner of our flight,
Determined of; how I must [climb][65] her window,
The ladder made of cords, and all the means
Plotted and 'greed on for my happiness.
Good Proteus, go with me to my chamber,
In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel.

[65]: {{page.q}}=3822  "climb (v.): reach, attain, achieve"

**PROTEUS**

Go on [before][66]; I shall [inquire][67] you forth.
I must unto the [road][68] to disembark
Some necessaries that I needs must use;
And then I'll [presently][70] [attend][69] you.

[66]: {{page.q}}=1601  "before (adv.) 1: ahead, in advance"
[67]: {{page.q}}=5174  "inquire forth (v.): seek out, ask after one's whereabouts"
[68]: {{page.q}}=16798  "road (n.) 1: harbour, anchorage, roadstead"
[69]: {{page.q}}=76  "attend (v.) 4: accompany, follow closely, go with"
[70]: {{page.q}}=13077  "presently (adv.) 2: after a short time, soon, before long"

**VALENTINE**

Will you make haste?


**PROTEUS**

I will.

*Exit Valentine*

Even as one heat another heat expels,
Or as one nail by strength drives out another,
So the [remembrance][71] of my former love
Is by a newer object quite forgotten.
Is it mine eye, or Valentine's praise,
Her true perfection, or my [false][72] transgression,
That makes me reasonless to reason thus?
She is [fair][73]; and so is Julia that I love –
That I did love, for now my love is thawed;
Which, like a waxen image 'gainst a fire,
Bears no impression of the thing it was.
[Methinks][74] my zeal to Valentine is cold,
And that I love him not as I was [wont][75].
O, but I love his lady too too much!
And that's the reason I love him so little.
How shall I dote on her with more [advice][76],
That thus without advice begin to love her!
'Tis but her [picture][77] I have yet beheld,
And that hath dazzled my reason's light;
But when I look on her perfections,
There is no [reason][78] but I shall be blind.
If I can check my erring love, I will;
If not, to [compass][79] her I'll use my skill.

Exit

[71]: {{page.q}}=17226  "remembrance (n.) 1: memory, bringing to mind, recollection"
[72]: {{page.q}}=19969  "false (adj.) 2: disloyal, faithless, inconstant, unfaithful"
[73]: {{page.q}}=19963  "fair (adj.) 1: handsome, good-looking, beautiful"
[74]: {{page.q}}=10439  "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.): it seems /seemed to me"
[75]: {{page.q}}=7592  "wont (v.): be accustomed, used [to], be in the habit of"
[76]: {{page.q}}=369  "advice (n.) 1: consideration, reflection, deliberation"
[77]: {{page.q}}=13234  "picture (n.) 1: appearance, countenance, visible form"
[78]: {{page.q}}=17172  "reason (n.) 6: alternative, choice, possibility"
[79]: {{page.q}}=3504  "compass (v.) 2: win, obtain, attain"
