---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act II - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
source: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Plays.aspx?Ac=2&SC=1&IdPlay=5
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act2_scene1.html
layout: book_page
tag: [ shakespeare  ]
creation: 1589-1593
date: 2014-03-28 08:43:00 +0800
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

Enter Valentine and Speed

**SPEED**

Sir, your glove.


**VALENTINE**

                  Not mine. My gloves are on.


**SPEED**

Why then, this may be yours, for this is but one.


**VALENTINE**

Ha! Let me see. Ay, give it me, it's mine.
Sweet ornament that decks a thing divine.
Ah, Silvia, Silvia!


**SPEED**

Madam Silvia! Madam Silvia!


**VALENTINE**

How now, sirrah?


**SPEED**

She is not within hearing, sir.


**VALENTINE**

Why, sir, who bade you call her?


**SPEED**

Your worship, sir, or else I mistook.


**VALENTINE**

Well, you'll [still][1] be too forward.

[1]: {{page.q}}=14077  "still (adv.) 1: constantly, always, continually"

**SPEED**

And yet I was last [chidden][2] for being too slow.

[2]: {{page.q}}=4299  "chide (v.), past form chid 1: scold, rebuke, reprove"

**VALENTINE**

Go to, sir. Tell me, do you know Madam
Silvia?


**SPEED**

She that your worship loves?


**VALENTINE**

Why, how know you that I am in love?


**SPEED**

Marry, by these special marks: first, you have
learned, like Sir Proteus, to [wreathe][3] your arms, like a
[malcontent][4]; to [relish][5] a love-song, like a robin-redbreast;
to walk alone, like one that had the pestilence; to sigh,
like a schoolboy that had lost his A B C; to weep, like a
young [wench][6] that had buried her grandam; to fast, like
one that takes [diet][7]; to [watch][8], like one that fears robbing;
to speak [puling][9], like a beggar at Hallowmas. You were
[wont][10], when you laughed, to crow like a cock; when you
walked, to walk like one of the lions; when you fasted,
it was [presently][11] after dinner; when you looked sadly, it
was for want of money. And now you are [metamorphose][12]d
with a mistress, that, when I look on you, I can
hardly think you my master.

[3]: {{page.q}}=8013  "wreathe (v.): fold, intertwine"
[4]: {{page.q}}=10566  "malcontent (n.): discontented individual, trouble-maker"
[5]: {{page.q}}=17196  "relish (v.) 5: sing, warble, croon"
[6]: {{page.q}}=7615  "wench (n.): girl, lass"
[7]: {{page.q}}=9495  "diet (n.) 3: therapeutic nutrition, curative regime"
[8]: {{page.q}}=7558  "watch (v.) 1: stay awake, keep vigil"
[9]: {{page.q}}=13198  "puling (n./adj.) 2: whimperingly, whiningly, complainingly"
[10]: {{page.q}}=7592  "wont (v.): be accustomed, used [to], be in the habit of"
[11]: {{page.q}}=12248  "presently (adv.) 1: immediately, instantly, at once"
[12]: {{page.q}}=10982  "metamorphose (v.): transform, alter one's disposition, change one's shape"

**VALENTINE**

Are all these things perceived in me?


**SPEED**

They are all perceived without ye.


**VALENTINE**

Without me? They cannot.


**SPEED**

Without you? Nay, that's certain; for without you
were so simple, none else would. But you are so without
these follies, that these follies are within you, and shine
through you like the water in an [urinal][13], that not an eye
that sees you but is a physician to comment on your
malady.

[13]: {{page.q}}=6815  "urinal (n.): medical vessel for holding urine"

**VALENTINE**

But tell me, dost thou know my lady Silvia?


**SPEED**

She that you gaze on so, as she sits at supper?


**VALENTINE**

Hast thou observed that? Even she I mean.


**SPEED**

Why, sir, I know her not.


**VALENTINE**

Dost thou know her by my gazing on her,
and yet knowest her not?


**SPEED**

Is she not [hard-favoured][14], sir?

[14]: {{page.q}}=15277  "hard-favoured (adj.): ugly, unattractive, unsightly, hideous"

**VALENTINE**

Not so fair, boy, as [well-favoured][15].

[15]: {{page.q}}=7824  "well-favoured (adj.): good-looking, attractive in appearance"

**SPEED**

Sir, I know that well enough.


**VALENTINE**

What dost thou know?


**SPEED**

That she is not so fair as, of you, well favoured.


**VALENTINE**

I mean that her beauty is exquisite, but her
[favour][16] infinite.

[16]: {{page.q}}=19799  "favour (n.) 3: charm, attractiveness, gracefulness"

**SPEED**

That's because the one is painted, and the other
out of all [count][17].

[17]: {{page.q}}=2903  "count (n.) 1: account, reckoning"

**VALENTINE**

How painted? And how out of count?


**SPEED**

Marry, sir, so painted to make her fair, that no
man [count][18]s of her beauty.

[18]: {{page.q}}=3503  "count of (v.): take account of, esteem, appreciate"

**VALENTINE**

How esteemest thou me? I [account][19] of her
beauty.

[19]: {{page.q}}=754  "account (v.) 2: take account of, esteem, appreciate"

**SPEED**

You never saw her since she was deformed.


**VALENTINE**

How long hath she been deformed?


**SPEED**

Ever since you loved her.


**VALENTINE**

I have loved her ever since I saw her, and
still I see her beautiful.


**SPEED**

If you love her, you cannot see her.


**VALENTINE**

Why?


**SPEED**

Because Love is blind. O, that you had mine eyes,
or your own eyes had the [light][20]s they were [wont][21] to have,
when you [chid][22] at Sir Proteus for going [ungartered][23]!

[20]: {{page.q}}=19549  "light (n.) 1: ability to see clearly, power of vision"
[21]: {{page.q}}=7592  "wont (v.): be accustomed, used [to], be in the habit of"
[22]: {{page.q}}=4299  "chide (v.), past form chid 1: scold, rebuke, reprove"
[23]: {{page.q}}=6669  "ungartered (v.): untied, not wearing a garter [a sign of a lovesick man]"

**VALENTINE**

What should I see then?


**SPEED**

Your own present folly, and her [passing][24] deformity;
for he, being in love, could not see to garter his hose;
and you, being in love, cannot see to put on your hose.

[24]: {{page.q}}=13188  "passing (adj.) 1: unsurpassed, extreme, pre-eminent"

**VALENTINE**

[Belike][25], boy, then you are in love; for last
morning you could not see to wipe my shoes.

[25]: {{page.q}}=1442  "belike (adv.): probably, presumably, perhaps, so it seems"

**SPEED**

True, sir; I was in love with my bed. I thank you,
you [swinge][26]d me for my love, which makes me the bolder
to [chide][27] you for yours.

[26]: {{page.q}}=15587  "swinge (v.): beat, thrash, flog"
[27]: {{page.q}}=4299  "chide (v.), past form chid 1: scold, rebuke, reprove"

**VALENTINE**

In conclusion, I stand [affected][28] to her.

[28]: {{page.q}}=557  "affected (adj.) 2: devoted, totally in love [with]"

**SPEED**

I would you were [set][29], so your affection would
cease.

[29]: {{page.q}}=15588  "set (adj.) 4: seated, sitting down"

**VALENTINE**

Last night she enjoined me to write some
lines to one she loves.


**SPEED**

And have you?


**VALENTINE**

I have.


**SPEED**

Are they not [lamely][30] writ?

[30]: {{page.q}}=19511  "lamely (adv.): imperfectly, defectively; also, haltingly, in a lame manner"

**VALENTINE**

No, boy, but as well as I can do them. Peace,
here she comes.

*Enter Silvia*

**SPEED**

(aside)
O excellent [motion][31]! O exceeding puppet!
Now will he interpret to her.

[31]: {{page.q}}=10852  "motion (n.) 11: puppet-show"

**VALENTINE**

Madam and mistress, a thousand good
morrows.


**SPEED**

(aside)
O, give ye good even! Here's a million of
manners.


**SILVIA**

Sir Valentine and servant, to you two thousand.


**SPEED**

(aside)
He should give her interest, and she gives it
him.


**VALENTINE**

As you enjoined me, I have writ your letter
Unto the secret nameless friend of yours;
Which I was much unwilling to proceed in,
But for my duty to your ladyship.
He gives her the letter

**SILVIA**

I thank you, [gentle][33] servant, 'tis very clerkly[32] done.

[32]: {{page.q}}=3359  "clerkly (adv.): scholarly, cleverly, adroitly"
[33]: {{page.q}}=17496  "gentle (adj.) 2: courteous, friendly, kind"

**VALENTINE**

Now trust me, madam, it [came][34] [hardly][35] off;
For, being ignorant to whom it goes,
I writ at random, very doubtfully.

[34]: {{page.q}}=2667  "come off (v.) 4: turn out, result"
[35]: {{page.q}}=18252  "hardly (adv.) 1: with great difficulty, only with difficulty"

**SILVIA**

[Perchance][36] you think too much of so much pains?

[36]: {{page.q}}=12175  "perchance (adv.) 1: perhaps, maybe"

**VALENTINE**

No, madam; so it [stead][37] you, I will write,
Please you command, a thousand times as much;
And yet –

[37]: {{page.q}}=14127  "stead (v.): help, assist, benefit"

**SILVIA**

A pretty [period][38]! Well, I guess the sequel;
And yet I will not name it; and yet I care not;
And yet take this [again][39];
She offer him the letter <br />
                  and yet I thank you, <br>
Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.

[38]: {{page.q}}=13199  "period (n.) 3: rhetorical pause, sentence ending, termination"
[39]: {{page.q}}=200  "again (adv.) 1: in return, back [in response]"

**SPEED**

(aside)
And yet you will; and yet, another ‘ yet.’


**VALENTINE**

What means your ladyship? Do you not like it?


**SILVIA**

Yes, yes; the lines are very [quaintly][40] writ;
But, since unwillingly, take them again.
Nay, take them.
She offers the letter again

[40]: {{page.q}}=13727  "quaintly (adv.) 1: subtly, skilfully, ingeniously"

**VALENTINE**

                  Madam, they are for you.


**SILVIA**

Ay, ay; you writ them, sir, at my request,
But I will none of them; they are for you.
I would have had them writ more movingly.
Valentine takes the letter


**VALENTINE**

Please you, I'll write your ladyship another.


**SILVIA**

And when it's writ, for my sake read it over;
And if it please you, so; if not, why, so.


**VALENTINE**

If it please me, madam, what then?


**SILVIA**

Why, if it please you, take it for your labour.
And so, good [morrow][41], servant.

Exit

[41]: {{page.q}}=10890  "morrow (n.): morning"

**SPEED**

(aside)
O jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible
As a nose on a man's face, or a weathercock on a steeple!
My master [sue][42]s to her; and she hath taught her suitor,
He being her pupil, to become her tutor.
O excellent device! Was there ever heard a better,
That my master, being scribe, to himself should write the letter?

[42]: {{page.q}}=16533  "sue (v.) 2: pay court, act as a suitor"

**VALENTINE**

How now, sir? What are you [reason][43]ing with
yourself?

[43]: {{page.q}}=16993  "reason (v.) 3: raise, bring up, discuss"

**SPEED**

Nay, I was rhyming; 'tis you that have the reason.


**VALENTINE**

To do what?


**SPEED**

To be a spokesman for Madam Silvia.


**VALENTINE**

To whom?


**SPEED**

To yourself. Why, she woos you by a [figure][44].

[44]: {{page.q}}=19824  "figure (n.) 2: figure of speech, device, piece of rhetoric"

**VALENTINE**

What figure?


**SPEED**

By a letter, I should say.


**VALENTINE**

Why, she hath not writ to me.


**SPEED**

What need she, when she hath made you write to
yourself? Why, do you not perceive the jest?


**VALENTINE**

No, believe me.


**SPEED**

No believing you, indeed, sir. But did you perceive
her [earnest][45]?

[45]: {{page.q}}=9753  "earnest (n.): pledge, instalment, deposit, payment in advance"

**VALENTINE**

She gave me none, except an angry word.


**SPEED**

Why, she hath given you a letter.


**VALENTINE**

That's the letter I writ to her friend.


**SPEED**

And that letter hath she delivered, and there an
end.


**VALENTINE**

I would it were no worse.


**SPEED**

I'll [warrant][46] you, 'tis as well:
For often have you writ to her; and she, in modesty,
Or else for want of idle time, could not again reply;
Or fearing else some messenger, that might her mind [discover][47],
Herself hath taught her love himself to write unto her lover.
All this I speak [in][48] print, for in print I found it. Why
[muse][49] you, sir? 'Tis dinner-time.

[46]: {{page.q}}=7550  "warrant (v.) 1: assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"
[47]: {{page.q}}=8538  "discover (v.) 1: reveal, show, make known"
[48]: {{page.q}}=12129  "print, in: in a precise way, by the letter, very carefully"
[49]: {{page.q}}=10970  "muse (v.) 3: wonder, speculate, ponder"

**VALENTINE**

I have dined.


**SPEED**

Ay, but hearken, sir: though the chameleon Love
can feed on the air, I am one that am nourished by my
victuals, and would [fain][50] have meat. O, be not like your
mistress; be [move][51]d, be moved.
Exeunt

[50]: {{page.q}}=19773  "fain (adv.): gladly, willingly"
[51]: {{page.q}}=10534  "move (v.) 1: arouse, affect, stir [by emotion]"
