---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act II - Scene V
category: play
author: shakespeare
source: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Plays.aspx?Ac=2&SC=5&IdPlay=5
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act2_scene5.html
layout: book_page
tag: [ shakespeare  ]
creation: 1589-1593
date: 2014-03-28 09:10:00 +0800
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

Enter Speed and Launce, meeting


**SPEED**

Launce! By mine honesty, welcome to Milan.


**LAUNCE**

[Forswear ][1]not thyself, sweet youth, for I am not
welcome. I reckon this always, that a man is never [undone][2]
till he be hanged, nor never welcome to a place till
some certain [shot][3] be paid, and the hostess say,
‘ Welcome.’

[1]: {{page.q}}=19872  "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 1: swear falsely, perjure [oneself], break one's word"
[2]: {{page.q}}=7007  "undone (adj.): ruined, destroyed, brought down"
[3]: {{page.q}}=14956  "shot (n.) 4: tavern bill, reckoning"

**SPEED**

Come on, you [madcap][4]; I'll to the alehouse with
you [presently][5]; where, for one shot of five pence, thou
shalt have five thousand welcomes. But, sirrah, how did
thy master [part][6] with Madam Julia?

[4]: {{page.q}}=11164  "madcap (n.): mad-brained fellow, lunatic"
[5]: {{page.q}}=12248  "presently (adv.) 1: immediately, instantly, at once"
[6]: {{page.q}}=12396  "part (v.) 1: depart [from], leave, quit"

**LAUNCE**

Marry, after they [close][7]d in earnest, they parted
very fairly in jest.

[7]: {{page.q}}=3505  "close (v.) 5: embrace, cuddle, hug"

**SPEED**

But shall she marry him?


**LAUNCE**

No.


**SPEED**

How then? Shall he marry her?


**LAUNCE**

No, neither.


**SPEED**

What, are they [broken][8]?

[8]: {{page.q}}=2251  "broken (adj.) 4: fallen out, with the relationship in pieces"

**LAUNCE**

No, they are both as whole as a fish.


**SPEED**

Why, then, how stands the [matter][9] with them?

[9]: {{page.q}}=10513  "matter (n.) 4: affair(s), business, real issue"

**LAUNCE**

Marry, thus: when it stands well with him, it
stands well with her.


**SPEED**

What an ass art thou! I understand thee not.


**LAUNCE**

What a [block][10] art thou, that thou canst not! My
staff understands me.

[10]: {{page.q}}=1963  "block (n.) 1: blockhead"

**SPEED**

What thou sayest?


**LAUNCE**

Ay, and what I do too; look there, I'll but lean,
and my staff [understand][11]s me.

[11]: {{page.q}}=6762  "understand (v.) 1: stand under the force of [with pun on ‘comprehend’]"

**SPEED**

It stands under thee, indeed.


**LAUNCE**

Why, stand-under and under-stand is all one.


**SPEED**

But tell me true, will't be a match?


**LAUNCE**

Ask my dog. If he say ay, it will; if he say no, it
will; if he shake his tail and say nothing, it will.


**SPEED**

The conclusion is, then, that it will.


**LAUNCE**

Thou shalt never get such a secret from me but
by a [parable][12].

[12]: {{page.q}}=13204  "parable (n.): indirect means, oblique utterance, similitude"

**SPEED**

'Tis well that I get it so. But, Launce, how sayest
thou that my master is become a notable lover?


**LAUNCE**

I never knew him otherwise.


**SPEED**

Than how?


**LAUNCE**

A notable [lubber][13], as thou reportest him to be.

[13]: {{page.q}}=19354  "lubber (n.): clumsy dolt, blundering lout"

**SPEED**

Why, thou whoreson ass, thou mistakest me.


**LAUNCE**

Why, fool, I meant not thee, I meant thy
master.


**SPEED**

I tell thee my master is become a hot lover.


**LAUNCE**

Why, I tell thee, I care not though he burn himself
in love. If thou wilt, go with me to the alehouse; if
not, thou art an Hebrew, a Jew, and not worth the name
of a Christian.


**SPEED**

Why?


**LAUNCE**

Because thou hast not so much charity in thee as
to go to the [ale][14] with a Christian. Wilt thou go?

[14]: {{page.q}}=559  "ale (n.): ale-house, tavern"

**SPEED**

At thy service.
Exeunt
