---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act II - Scene III
category: play
author: shakespeare
source: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Plays.aspx?Ac=2&SC=3&IdPlay=5
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act2_scene3.html
layout: book_page
tag: [ shakespeare  ]
creation: 1589-1593
date: 2014-03-28 08:58:00 +0800
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

Enter Launce with his dog, Crab

**LAUNCE**

Nay, 'twill be this hour ere I have done weeping;
all the [kind][1] of the Launces have this very fault. I have
received my [proportion][3], like the [prodigious][2] son, and am
going with Sir Proteus to the [Imperial][4]'s court. I think
Crab my dog be the sourest-natured dog that lives. My
mother weeping, my father wailing, my sister crying,
our maid howling, our cat wringing her hands, and all
our house in a great perplexity; yet did not this cruel-hearted
cur shed one tear. He is a stone, a very pebble-stone,
and has no more pity in him than a dog. A Jew
would have wept to have seen our [parting][5]. Why, my
grandam, having no eyes, look you, wept herself blind
at my parting. Nay, I'll show you the manner of it.
This shoe is my father. No, this left shoe is my father.
No, no, this left shoe is my mother. Nay, that cannot be
so neither. Yes, it is so, it is so; it hath the worser sole.
This shoe with the hole in it is my mother, and this my
father. A vengeance on't, there 'tis. Now, sir, this staff
is my sister; for, look you, she is as white as a lily, and
as [small][6] as a wand. This hat is Nan our maid. I am the
dog. No, the dog is himself, and I am the dog. O, the
dog is me, and I am myself. Ay, so, so. Now come I to
my father: ‘ Father, your blessing.’ Now should not the
shoe speak a word for weeping. Now should I kiss my
father; well, he weeps on. Now come I to my mother.
O, that she could speak now like an old woman! Well,
I kiss her. Why, there 'tis; here's my mother's breath [up][7]
and down. Now come I to my sister. [Mark][8] the moan she
makes. Now the dog all this while sheds not a tear, nor
speaks a word; but see how I [lay][9] the dust with my tears.
Enter Panthino

[1]: {{page.q}}=15287  "kind (n.) 5: breed, lineage, stock, family"
[2]: {{page.q}}=13201  "prodigious (adj.) 3: malapropism for ‘prodigal’"
[3]: {{page.q}}=13200  "proportion (n.) 11: malapropism for ‘portion’ [= share of the estate]"
[4]: {{page.q}}=5173  "imperial (n.): emperor, imperial personage"
[5]: {{page.q}}=13202  "parting (n.): departure, leave-taking, setting-out"
[6]: {{page.q}}=15636  "small (adj.) 1: slender, slim"
[7]: {{page.q}}=6977  "up and down (adv.): exactly, completely, in every respect"
[8]: {{page.q}}=10405  "mark (v.) 1: note, pay attention [to], take notice [of]"
[9]: {{page.q}}=19550  "lay (v.) 7: keep down, make subside"

**PANTHINO**

Launce, away, away! Aboard! Thy master is
shipped, and thou art to [post][10] after with oars. What's the
matter? Why weepest thou, man? Away, ass, you'll lose
the tide, if you [tarry][11] any longer.

[10]: {{page.q}}=12224  "post (v.) 1: hasten, speed, ride fast"
[11]: {{page.q}}=5567  "tarry (v.) 1: stay, remain, linger"

**LAUNCE**

It is no matter if the tied were lost, for it is the
unkindest tied that ever any man tied.


**PANTHINO**

What's the unkindest tide?


**LAUNCE**

Why, he that's tied here, Crab, my dog.


**PANTHINO**

Tut, man, I mean thou'lt lose the flood; and,
in losing the flood, lose thy voyage; and, in losing thy
voyage, lose thy master; and, in losing thy master, lose
thy service; and, in losing thy service – Why dost thou
stop my mouth?


**LAUNCE**

For fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue.


**PANTHINO**

Where should I lose my tongue?


**LAUNCE**

In thy tale.


**PANTHINO**

In my tail!


**LAUNCE**

Lose the tide, and the voyage, and the master,
and the service, and the tied. Why, man, if the river
were dry, I am able to fill it with my tears. If the wind
were down, I could drive the boat with my sighs.


**PANTHINO**

Come, come away, man. I was sent to call
thee.


**LAUNCE**

Sir, call me what thou darest.


**PANTHINO**

Wilt thou go?


**LAUNCE**

Well, I will go.
Exeunt
