---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act II - Scene VII
category: play
author: shakespeare
source: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Plays.aspx?Ac=2&SC=7&IdPlay=5
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act2_scene7.html
layout: book_page
tag: [ shakespeare  ]
creation: 1589-1593
date: 2014-03-28 09:14:00 +0800
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

Enter Julia and Lucetta


**JULIA**

Counsel, Lucetta; [gentle][1] girl, assist me;
And, e'en in kind love, I do [conjure][2] thee,
Who art the [table][3] wherein all my thoughts
Are visibly [character][4]ed and engraved,
To [lesson][5] me and tell me some good [mean][6]
How, with my honour, I may undertake
A journey to my loving Proteus.

[1]: {{page.q}}=17496  "gentle (adj.) 2: courteous, friendly, kind"
[2]: {{page.q}}=2714  "conjure (v.) 1: ask solemnly, entreat earnestly, beseech"
[3]: {{page.q}}=5419  "table (n.) 1: writing tablet, memo pad, notebook"
[4]: {{page.q}}=4286  "character (v.): inscribe, engrave, write"
[5]: {{page.q}}=15310  "lesson (v.) 1: instruct, teach, advise"
[6]: {{page.q}}=10600  "mean (n.) 1: means, way, method"

**LUCETTA**

Alas, the way is wearisome and long!


**JULIA**

A true-devoted pilgrim is not weary
To [measure][7] kingdoms with his feeble steps;
Much less shall she that hath Love's wings to fly,
And when the flight is made to one so dear,
Of such divine perfection as Sir Proteus.

[7]: {{page.q}}=10709  "measure (v.) 1: pass through, travel over, traverse"

**LUCETTA**

Better [forbear][8] till Proteus make return.

[8]: {{page.q}}=20034  "forbear (v.) 3: control oneself, have patience [for]"

**JULIA**

O, knowest thou not his looks are my soul's food?
Pity the [dearth][9] that I have pined in
By longing for that food so long a time.
Didst thou but know the [inly][10] touch of love,
Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow
As seek to quench the fire of love with words.

[9]: {{page.q}}=8682  "dearth (n.) 1: scarcity, shortage, lack [of food], famine"
[10]: {{page.q}}=5165  "inly (adj.): inward, internal, heartfelt"

**LUCETTA**

I do not seek to quench your love's hot fire,
But [qualify][11] the fire's extreme rage,
Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.

[11]: {{page.q}}=13728  "qualify (v.) 1: moderate, weaken, diminish"

**JULIA**

The more thou dammest it up, the more it burns.
The current that with [gentle][12] murmur glides,
Thou knowest, being stopped, impatiently doth rage;
But when his fair [course][13] is not hindered,
He makes sweet music with th' [enamelled][14] stones,
Giving a [gentle][15] kiss to every [sedge][16]
He overtaketh in his pilgrimage;
And so by many winding nooks he strays,
With willing [sport][17], to the wild ocean.
Then let me go, and hinder not my course.
I'll be as patient as a [gentle][18] stream,
And make a pastime of each weary step,
Till the last step have brought me to my love;
And there I'll rest as, after much turmoil,
A blessed soul doth in Elysium.

[12]: {{page.q}}=21290  "gentle (adj.) 7: smooth-flowing, not rough or rapid"
[13]: {{page.q}}=3134  "course (n.) 1: course of action, way of proceeding"
[14]: {{page.q}}=9712  "enamelled (adj.): brightly coloured, multi-coloured, kaleidoscopic"
[15]: {{page.q}}=21269  "gentle (adj.) 6: soft, tender, kind"
[16]: {{page.q}}=15590  "sedge (n.): variety of grassy plant, rush"
[17]: {{page.q}}=14044  "sport (n.) 1: recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[18]: {{page.q}}=21290  "gentle (adj.) 7: smooth-flowing, not rough or rapid"

**LUCETTA**

But in what [habit][19] will you go along?

[19]: {{page.q}}=15263  "habit (n.) 1: dress, clothing, costume"

**JULIA**

Not like a woman, for I would [prevent][20]
The loose [encounter][21]s of lascivious men.
[Gentle][22] Lucetta, fit me with such [weed][23]s
As may [beseem][24] some well-reputed page.

[20]: {{page.q}}=12700  "prevent (v.) 2: take steps to thwart, avoid by prompt action"
[21]: {{page.q}}=10089  "encounter (n.) 2: accosting, address, approach"
[22]: {{page.q}}=17496  "gentle (adj.) 2: courteous, friendly, kind"
[23]: {{page.q}}=7564  "weed (n.) 1: (plural) garments, dress, clothes"
[24]: {{page.q}}=1509  "beseem (v.): befit, be fitting [for], be seemly [for]"

**LUCETTA**

Why then, your ladyship must cut your hair.


**JULIA**

No, girl, I'll [knit][25] it up in silken strings
With twenty [odd-conceited][26] true-love knots –
To be [fantastic][28] may [become][27] a youth
Of greater [time][30] than I shall [show][29] to be.

[25]: {{page.q}}=15279  "knit, knit up (v.) 1: tie, fasten [by means of a knot]"
[26]: {{page.q}}=11917  "odd-conceited (adj.): elaborately odd, ingeniously devised"
[27]: {{page.q}}=1432  "become (v.) 1: be fitting, befit, be appropriate to"
[28]: {{page.q}}=19787  "fantastic (adj.) 1: extravagant, fanciful, ingenious"
[29]: {{page.q}}=14157  "show (v.): appear, look [like], present [as]"
[30]: {{page.q}}=6044  "time (n.) 4: age, years"

**LUCETTA**

What fashion, madam, shall I make your breeches?


**JULIA**

That fits as well as, ‘ Tell me, good my lord,
What [compass][31] will you wear your [farthingale][32]?’
Why e'en what fashion thou best [like][33]s, Lucetta.

[31]: {{page.q}}=3544  "compass (n.) 3: circumference, round measurement"
[32]: {{page.q}}=20205  "farthingale (n.): long skirt extended at the back by a framework of hoops"
[33]: {{page.q}}=19138  "like (v.) 1: please, suit"

**LUCETTA**

You must needs have them with a [codpiece][34], madam.

[34]: {{page.q}}=3478  "codpiece, cod-piece (n.) 1: cloth case or pocket worn by a man at the front of breeches or hose; also: what it contains"

**JULIA**

Out, out, Lucetta, that will be [ill-favoured][35].

[35]: {{page.q}}=4814  "ill-favoured (adj.): ugly, unattractive, unsightly"

**LUCETTA**

A round [hose][36], madam, now's not worth a [pin][37],
Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.

[36]: {{page.q}}=18199  "hose (n.): [pair of] breeches"
[37]: {{page.q}}=12723  "pin (n.) 1: trifle, triviality, insignificant amount"

**JULIA**

Lucetta, as thou lovest me, let me have
What thou thinkest [meet][38], and is most mannerly.
But tell me, [wench][40], how will the world [repute][39] me
For undertaking so [unstaid][41] a journey?
I fear me it will make me [scandalized][42].

[38]: {{page.q}}=10430  "meet (adj.) 1: fit, suitable, right, proper"
[39]: {{page.q}}=17114  "repute (v.): consider, think, reckon"
[40]: {{page.q}}=7615  "wench (n.): girl, lass"
[41]: {{page.q}}=6979  "unstaid (adj.) 3: immodest, undignified, indecorous"
[42]: {{page.q}}=15591  "scandalized (adj.): disgraced, defamed, made a subject of scandal"

**LUCETTA**

If you think so, then stay at home and go not.


**JULIA**

Nay, that I will not.


**LUCETTA**

Then never dream on [infamy][43], but go.
If Proteus like your journey when you come,
No matter who's displeased when you are gone.
I fear me he will scarce be pleased withal.

[43]: {{page.q}}=4939  "infamy (n.): bad report, terrible reputation"

**JULIA**

That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear:
A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears,
And instances of [infinite][44] of love,
[Warrant][45] me welcome to my Proteus.

[44]: {{page.q}}=5175  "infinite (n.) 1: infinity, infinite quantity, eternity"
[45]: {{page.q}}=7755  "warrant (v.) 3: act as a pledge for, give an assurance about"

**LUCETTA**

All these are servants to deceitful men.


**JULIA**

[Base][46] men, that use them to so base [effect][47]!
But truer stars did govern Proteus' birth;
His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles,
His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,
His tears pure messengers sent from his heart,
His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.

[46]: {{page.q}}=1412  "base (adj.) 1: dishonourable, low, unworthy"
[47]: {{page.q}}=9801  "effect (n.) 1: result, end, outcome, fulfilment"

**LUCETTA**

Pray heaven he prove so when you come to him!


**JULIA**

Now, as thou lovest me, do him not that wrong
To bear a [hard][48] opinion of his truth;
Only deserve my love by loving him;
And [presently][49] go with me to my chamber,
To take a note of what I stand in need of
To [furnish][50] me upon my [longing][51] journey.
All that is mine I leave at thy [dispose][52],
My goods, my land, my reputation;
Only, in lieu thereof, [dispatch][53] me hence.
Come, answer not, but to it presently;
I am impatient of my [tarriance][54].
Exeunt

[48]: {{page.q}}=18599  "hard (adj.) 5: bad, poor, inadequate"
[49]: {{page.q}}=12248  "presently (adv.) 1: immediately, instantly, at once"
[50]: {{page.q}}=19897  "furnish (v.) 3: dress, clothe, equip, fit out"
[51]: {{page.q}}=19551  "longing (adj.): prompted by longing, full of yearning"
[52]: {{page.q}}=8659  "dispose (n.) 1: disposal, control, discretion"
[53]: {{page.q}}=9177  "dispatch, despatch (v.) 5: send away, send off"
[54]: {{page.q}}=6251  "tarriance (n.) 1: delay, procrastination, lingering"
