---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act III - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
source: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Plays.aspx?Ac=3&SC=1&IdPlay=5
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act3_scene1.html
layout: book_page
tag: [ shakespeare  ]
creation: 1589-1593
date: 2014-03-30 15:33:00 +0800
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

Enter the Duke of Milan, Thurio, and Proteus


**DUKE**

Sir Thurio, give us leave, I pray, awhile;
We have some secrets to confer about.
Exit Thurio
Now, tell me, Proteus, what's your will with me?


**PROTEUS**

My gracious lord, that which I would [discover][1]
The law of friendship bids me to conceal,
But when I call to mind your gracious favours
Done to me, undeserving as I am,
My duty [prick][2]s me on to utter that
Which else no worldly good should draw from me.
Know, worthy prince, Sir Valentine, my friend,
This night intends to steal away your daughter;
Myself am one made [privy][3] to the plot.
I know you have determined to bestow her
On Thurio, whom your [gentle][4] daughter hates;
And should she thus be stolen away from you,
It would be much vexation to your age.
Thus, for my duty's sake, I rather chose
To [cross][5] my friend in his intended [drift][6]
Than, by concealing it, heap on your head
A pack of sorrows which would press you down,
Being unprevented, to your [timeless][7] grave.

[1]: {{page.q}}=8538  "discover (v.) 1: reveal, show, make known"
[2]: {{page.q}}=12252  "prick on (v.): incite, urge on, spur on"
[3]: {{page.q}}=12256  "privy 1: privately aware [of], secretly knowledgeable [about]"
[4]: {{page.q}}=17495  "gentle (adj.) 1: well-born, honourable, noble"
[5]: {{page.q}}=2846  "cross (v.) 2: contradict, challenge, go against"
[6]: {{page.q}}=8478  "drift (n.) 1: plan, intention, aim"
[7]: {{page.q}}=5608  "timeless (adj.): untimely, premature, ill-timed"

**DUKE**

Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care,
Which to [requite][8], command me while I live.
This love of theirs myself have often seen,
[Haply][9] when they have [judge][10]d me fast asleep,
And [oftentimes][11] have [purpose][12]d to forbid
Sir Valentine her company and my court;
But, fearing lest my [jealous][14] [aim][13] might err,
And so, unworthily, disgrace the man –
A rashness that I ever yet have shunned –
I gave him [gentle][15] looks, thereby to find
That which thyself hast now disclosed to me.
And, that thou mayst perceive my fear of this,
Knowing that [tender][17] youth is soon [suggest][16]ed,
I nightly lodge her in an upper tower,
The key whereof myself have ever kept;
And thence she cannot be conveyed away.

[8]: {{page.q}}=16613  "requite (v.), past forms requit, requited 1: reward, repay, recompense"
[9]: {{page.q}}=15270  "haply (adv.): perhaps, maybe, by chance, with luck"
[10]: {{page.q}}=18929  "judge (v.) 1: suppose, consider, think"
[11]: {{page.q}}=11751  "oftentimes (adv.): often, frequently, on many occasions"
[12]: {{page.q}}=12477  "purpose (v.) 1: intend, plan"
[13]: {{page.q}}=560  "aim (n.) 1: guess, conjecture, surmise"
[14]: {{page.q}}=18903  "jealous (adj.) 1: suspicious, mistrustful, wary, watchful"
[15]: {{page.q}}=17496  "gentle (adj.) 2: courteous, friendly, kind"
[16]: {{page.q}}=14246  "suggest (v.) 1: tempt, prompt, incite"
[17]: {{page.q}}=5440  "tender (adj.) 2: immature, undeveloped, inexperienced"

**PROTEUS**

Know, noble lord, they have devised a [mean][18]
How he her chamber-window will ascend
And with a [corded][19] ladder fetch her down;
For which the youthful lover now is gone,
And this way comes he with it [presently][20];
Where, if it please you, you may intercept him.
But, good my lord, do it so cunningly
That my [discovery][22] be not [aim][21]ed at;
For, love of you, not hate unto my friend,
Hath made me [publisher][24] of this [pretence][23].

[18]: {{page.q}}=10600  "mean (n.) 1: means, way, method"
[19]: {{page.q}}=3506  "corded (adj.): made of ropes"
[20]: {{page.q}}=13077  "presently (adv.) 2: after a short time, soon, before long"
[21]: {{page.q}}=15  "aim (v.): guess, conjecture, surmise"
[22]: {{page.q}}=8428  "discovery (n.) 1: disclosure, admission, revelation"
[23]: {{page.q}}=12551  "pretence (n.) 1: plan, design, intention, purpose"
[24]: {{page.q}}=13205  "publisher (n.): exposer, divulger, one who makes public"

**DUKE**

Upon mine honour, he shall never know
That I had any [light][25] from thee of this.

[25]: {{page.q}}=19552  "light (n.) 4: help, enlightenment, information"

**PROTEUS**

Adieu, my lord, Sir Valentine is coming.

Exit
Enter Valentine


**DUKE**

Sir Valentine, whither away so fast?


**VALENTINE**

Please it your grace, there is a messenger
That stays to bear my letters to my friends,
And I am going to deliver them.


**DUKE**

Be they of much [import][26]?

[26]: {{page.q}}=4929  "import (n.): importance, significance, consequence"

**VALENTINE**

The tenor of them doth but signify
My health and [happy][28] [being][27] at your court.

[27]: {{page.q}}=1023  "being (n.) 2: physical existence, life"
[28]: {{page.q}}=18293  "happy (adj.) 1: fortunate, lucky, favoured"

**DUKE**

Nay then, no matter; stay with me awhile;
I am to [break][29] with thee of some affairs
That [touch][31] me [near][30], wherein thou must be secret.
'Tis not unknown to thee that I have sought
To match my friend Sir Thurio to my daughter.

[29]: {{page.q}}=1049  "break (v.) 5: reveal, disclose, impart"
[30]: {{page.q}}=11340  "near (adv.) 1: closely, intimately, seriously"
[31]: {{page.q}}=5598  "touch (v.) 1: affect, concern, regard, relate to"

**VALENTINE**

I know it well, my lord; and, sure, the match
Were rich and honourable; besides, the gentleman
Is full of virtue, bounty, worth, and [qualities][32]
[Beseem][33]ing such a wife as your fair daughter.
Cannot your grace win her to [fancy][34] him?

[32]: {{page.q}}=13854  "quality (n.) 2: accomplishment, capacity, ability"
[33]: {{page.q}}=1509  "beseem (v.): befit, be fitting [for], be seemly [for]"
[34]: {{page.q}}=20476  "fancy (v.): like, love, admire"

**DUKE**

No, trust me; she is [peevish][36], sullen, [froward][35],
Proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty;
Neither [regard][37]ing that she is my child,
Nor fearing me as if I were her father;
And, may I say to thee, this pride of hers,
Upon [advice][38], hath drawn my love from her;
And where I thought the remnant of mine [age][39]
Should have been cherished by her child-like duty,
I now am full resolved to take a wife
And turn her out to who will take her in.
Then let her beauty be her wedding-[dower][40];
For me and my possessions she esteems not.

[35]: {{page.q}}=19998  "froward (adj.) 1: perverse, obstinate, wilful, ungovernable"
[36]: {{page.q}}=13294  "peevish (adj.) 2: obstinate, perverse, self-willed [contrast modern sense of ‘irritable, morose’]"
[37]: {{page.q}}=16824  "regard (v.) 1: take note of, pay heed to, value"
[38]: {{page.q}}=369  "advice (n.) 1: consideration, reflection, deliberation"
[39]: {{page.q}}=193  "age (n.) 1: whole life, lifetime, days"
[40]: {{page.q}}=8649  "dower (n.): dowry, property or wealth given with a wife"

**VALENTINE**

What would your grace have me to do in this?


**DUKE**

There is a lady of Verona here
Whom I [affect][41]; but she is [nice][43], and [coy][42],
And naught esteems my aged eloquence.
Now, therefore, would I have thee to my tutor –
For long [agone][44] I have forgot to court;
Besides, the fashion of the time is changed –
How and which way I may [bestow][45] myself
To be regarded in her sun-bright eye.

[41]: {{page.q}}=106  "affect (v.) 2: love, like, be fond of"
[42]: {{page.q}}=2861  "coy (adj.) 2: unresponsive, distant, standoffish, disdainful"
[43]: {{page.q}}=11294  "nice (adj.) 1: fastidious, particular, fussy, overscrupulous"
[44]: {{page.q}}=561  "agone (adv.): ago, past"
[45]: {{page.q}}=1500  "bestow (v.) 8: carry, bear, acquit, conduct"

**VALENTINE**

Win her with gifts, if she [respect][46] not words;
Dumb jewels often in their silent [kind][47]
More than [quick][48] words do move a woman's mind.

[46]: {{page.q}}=16658  "respect (v.) 1: pay attention to, heed"
[47]: {{page.q}}=19004  "kind (n.) 1: nature, reality, character, disposition"
[48]: {{page.q}}=13754  "quick (adj.) 2: lively, animated, vivacious"

**DUKE**

But she did scorn a present that I sent her.


**VALENTINE**

A woman sometimes scorns what best [content][49]s her.
Send her another; never give her o'er;
For scorn at first makes [after-love][50] the more.
If she do frown, 'tis not in hate of you,
But rather to [beget][51] more love in you;
If she do [chide][52], 'tis not to have you gone,
For why, the fools are mad if left alone.
Take no repulse, whatever she doth say;
For ‘ Get you gone,’ she doth not mean ‘ Away!’
Flatter and praise, [commend][53], extol their graces;
Though ne'er so [black][54], say they have angels' faces.
That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man,
If with his tongue he cannot win a woman.

[49]: {{page.q}}=2885  "content (v.) 1: please, gratify, delight, satisfy"
[50]: {{page.q}}=251  "after-love (n.): later gratitude, future loyalty"
[51]: {{page.q}}=1602  "beget (v.), past form begot 2: produce, engender, give rise to"
[52]: {{page.q}}=4299  "chide (v.), past form chid 1: scold, rebuke, reprove"
[53]: {{page.q}}=2872  "commend (v.) 4: praise, admire, extol"
[54]: {{page.q}}=2163  "black (adj.) 1: dark-complexioned, swarthy"

**DUKE**

But she I mean is promised by her friends
Unto a youthful gentleman of worth;
And kept severely from [resort][55] of men,
That no man hath access by day to her.

[55]: {{page.q}}=16618  "resort (n.) 1: visits, visitings, approaches"

**VALENTINE**

Why then, I would resort to her by night.


**DUKE**

Ay, but the doors be locked, and keys kept safe,
That no man hath [recourse][56] to her by night.

[56]: {{page.q}}=16730  "recourse (n.) 1: opportunity of going, means of access"

**VALENTINE**

What [let][57]s but one may enter at her window?

[57]: {{page.q}}=19118  "let (v.) 1: hinder, prevent, stand in the way"

**DUKE**

Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground,
And built so [shelving][58] that one cannot climb it
Without [apparent][59] [hazard][60] of his life.

[58]: {{page.q}}=15592  "shelving (adv.): slopingly, projecting out, with an overhang"
[59]: {{page.q}}=192  "apparent (adj.) 2: certain, inevitable, evident"
[60]: {{page.q}}=18275  "hazard (n.) 1: risk, peril, danger"

**VALENTINE**

Why then, a ladder, [quaintly][61] made of cords,
To cast up with a pair of anchoring hooks,
Would serve to scale another Hero's tower,
So bold Leander would [adventure][62] it.

[61]: {{page.q}}=13727  "quaintly (adv.) 1: subtly, skilfully, ingeniously"
[62]: {{page.q}}=873  "adventure (v.): venture, dare, chance, risk"

**DUKE**

Now, as thou art a gentleman of [blood][63],
[Advise][64] me where I may have such a ladder.

[63]: {{page.q}}=1983  "blood (n.) 4: spirit, vigour, mettle"
[64]: {{page.q}}=533  "advise, avise (v.) 3: inform, be aware, apprise"

**VALENTINE**

When would you use it? Pray, sir, tell me that.


**DUKE**

This very night; for Love is like a child,
That longs for every thing that he can come by.


**VALENTINE**

By seven o'clock I'll get you such a ladder.


**DUKE**

But, hark thee; I will go to her alone;
How shall I best convey the ladder thither?


**VALENTINE**

It will be light, my lord, that you may bear it
Under a cloak that is of any length.


**DUKE**

A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn?


**VALENTINE**

Ay, my good lord.


**DUKE**

&nbsp               &nbsp Then let me see thy cloak;
I'll get me one of such another length.


**VALENTINE**

Why, any cloak will serve the turn, my lord.


**DUKE**

How shall I [fashion][65] me to wear a cloak?
I pray thee, let me feel thy cloak upon me.
He lifts Valentine's cloak and finds a letter and a
rope-ladder
What letter is this same? What's here? To Silvia!
And here an [engine][66] fit for my [proceeding][67].
I'll be so bold to break the seal for once.

(He opens the letter and reads)

My thoughts do [harbour][68] with my Silvia nightly,
And slaves they are to me, that send them flying.
O, could their master come and go as [lightly][69],
Himself would lodge where, [senseless][70], they are lying!
My [herald][71] thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them,
While I, their king, that thither them [importune][72],
Do curse the [[grace][74]][73] that with such grace hath blessed them,
Because myself do [want][75] my servants' fortune.
I curse myself, for they are sent by me,
That they should [harbour][76] where their lord should be.
What's here?
Silvia, this night I will [enfranchise][77] thee.
'Tis so; and here's the ladder for the purpose.
Why, Phaeton – for thou art Merops' son –
Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly [car][78],
And with thy daring folly burn the world?
Wilt thou reach stars, because they shine on thee?
Go, [base][79] intruder, [overweening][80] slave,
Bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates;
And think my patience, more than thy [desert][81],
Is privilege for thy departure hence.
Thank me for this more than for all the favours
Which, all too much, I have bestowed on thee.
But if thou linger in my territories
Longer than swiftest [expedition][82]
Will give thee time to leave our royal court,
By heaven, my wrath shall far exceed the love
I ever bore my daughter or thyself.
Be gone; I will not hear thy vain excuse,
But, as thou lovest thy life, make speed from hence.

Exit

[65]: {{page.q}}=20043  "fashion (v.) 1: form, shape, make [into]"
[66]: {{page.q}}=10014  "engine (n.) 1: plot, device, means, instrument"
[67]: {{page.q}}=12888  "proceeding (n.) 1: course of action, measures"
[68]: {{page.q}}=18308  "harbour (v.): lodge, stay, shelter"
[69]: {{page.q}}=19299  "lightly (adv.) 1: readily, easily"
[70]: {{page.q}}=14843  "senseless (adj.) 2: unconscious, insensible, oblivious"
[71]: {{page.q}}=18600  "herald (adj.): message-bearing, acting as a herald"
[72]: {{page.q}}=4833  "importune (v.) 1: urge, press"
[73]: {{page.q}}=17514  "grace (n.) 1: honour, favour, recognition, respect"
[74]: {{page.q}}=17602  "grace (n.) 7: success, favourable outcome, fortune"
[75]: {{page.q}}=7539  "want (v.) 1: lack, need, be without"
[76]: {{page.q}}=18308  "harbour (v.): lodge, stay, shelter"
[77]: {{page.q}}=9803  "enfranchise (v.): set free, liberate"
[78]: {{page.q}}=3953  "car (n.): carriage, cart, chariot [often of the sun god]"
[79]: {{page.q}}=1412  "base (adj.) 1: dishonourable, low, unworthy"
[80]: {{page.q}}=11674  "overweening (adj.): arrogant, overambitious, high and mighty"
[81]: {{page.q}}=8594  "desert, desart (n.) 1: deserving, due recompense, right"
[82]: {{page.q}}=9938  "expedition (n.) 1: haste, speedy action, prompt dispatch"

**VALENTINE**

And why not death, rather than living torment?
To die is to be banished from myself,
And Silvia is myself; banished from her
Is self from self – a deadly banishment.
What light is light, if Silvia be not seen?
What joy is joy, if Silvia be not by?
Unless it be to think that she is by,
And feed upon the [shadow][83] of perfection.
Except I be by Silvia in the night,
There is no music in the nightingale;
Unless I look on Silvia in the day,
There is no day for me to look upon.
She is my [essence][84], and I [leave][85] to be,
If I be not by her fair influence
Fostered, illumined, cherished, kept alive.
I fly not death, to fly his deadly doom:
[Tarry][87] I here, I but [attend][86] on death;
But fly I hence, I fly away from life.
Enter Proteus and Launce

[83]: {{page.q}}=15593  "shadow (n.) 4: illusion, unreal image, delusion"
[84]: {{page.q}}=10090  "essence (n.): very life, foundation of being"
[85]: {{page.q}}=19112  "leave (v.) 1: cease, stop, give up"
[86]: {{page.q}}=78  "attend (v.) 1: await, wait for, expect"
[87]: {{page.q}}=5567  "tarry (v.) 1: stay, remain, linger"

**PROTEUS**

Run, boy, run, run, and seek him out.


**LAUNCE**

So-ho, so-ho!


**PROTEUS**

What seest thou?


**LAUNCE**

Him we go to find: there's not a hair on's head
but 'tis a Valentine.


**PROTEUS**

Valentine?


**VALENTINE**

No.


**PROTEUS**

Who then? His spirit?


**VALENTINE**

Neither.


**PROTEUS**

What then?


**VALENTINE**

Nothing.


**LAUNCE**

Can nothing speak? Master, shall I strike?


**PROTEUS**

Who wouldst thou strike?


**LAUNCE**

Nothing.


**PROTEUS**

Villain, [forbear][88].

[88]: {{page.q}}=19856  "forbear (v.) 1: stop, cease, desist"

**LAUNCE**

Why, sir, I'll strike nothing. I pray you –


**PROTEUS**

Sirrah, I say forbear. Friend Valentine, a word.


**VALENTINE**

My ears are stopped and cannot hear good news,
So much of bad already hath possessed them.


**PROTEUS**

Then in dumb silence will I bury mine,
For they are harsh, [untuneable][89], and bad.

[89]: {{page.q}}=6727  "untuneable (adj.): unsuitable, disagreeable; or: unmelodious"

**VALENTINE**

Is Silvia dead?


**PROTEUS**

No, Valentine.


**VALENTINE**

No Valentine, indeed, for [sacred][90] Silvia.
Hath she [forsworn][91] me?

[90]: {{page.q}}=16358  "sacred (adj.) 2: revered, respected [as if a holy thing]"
[91]: {{page.q}}=19977  "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 2: abandon, renounce, reject, give up"

**PROTEUS**

No, Valentine.


**VALENTINE**

No Valentine, if Silvia have forsworn me.
What is your news?


**LAUNCE**

Sir, there is a proclamation that you are vanished.


**PROTEUS**

That thou art banished – O, that's the news! –
From hence, from Silvia, and from me thy friend.


**VALENTINE**

O, I have fed upon this woe already,
And now excess of it will make me [surfeit][92].
Doth Silvia know that I am banished?

[92]: {{page.q}}=15594  "surfeit (v.) 2: become sick through having too much"

**PROTEUS**

Ay, ay; and she hath offered to the [doom][93] –
Which, unreversed, stands in [effectual][94] force –
A sea of melting pearl, which some call tears;
Those at her father's churlish feet she tendered;
With them, upon her knees, her humble self,
Wringing her hands, whose whiteness so [became][95] them
As if but now they waxed pale for woe.
But neither bended knees, pure hands held up,
[Sad][96] sighs, deep groans, nor silver-shedding tears,
Could penetrate her uncompassionate sire –
But Valentine, if he be ta'en, must die.
Besides, her intercession [chafe][97]d him so,
When she for thy [repeal][98] was suppliant,
That to [close][99] prison he commanded her,
With many bitter threats of [biding][100] there.

[93]: {{page.q}}=8461  "doom (n.) 1: judgement, sentence, decision"
[94]: {{page.q}}=10353  "effectual (adj.) 3: effective, actual, with full effect"
[95]: {{page.q}}=1432  "become (v.) 1: be fitting, befit, be appropriate to"
[96]: {{page.q}}=15557  "sad (adj.) 3: downcast, distressed, mournful, gloomy"
[97]: {{page.q}}=4472  "chafe (v.) 2: enrage, irritate, anger"
[98]: {{page.q}}=16833  "repeal (n.): recall, return from banishment"
[99]: {{page.q}}=3143  "close (adj.) 2: private, secluded, sequestered"
[100]: {{page.q}}=1070  "bide (v.) 3: remain, persist, continue in being"

**VALENTINE**

No more; unless the next word that thou speakest
Have some malignant [power][101] upon my life;
If so, I pray thee breathe it in mine ear,
As [ending][104] [anthem][102] of my endless [dolour][103].

[101]: {{page.q}}=12912  "power (n.) 7: control, influence, sway"
[102]: {{page.q}}=562  "anthem (n.): song of mourning, hymn of grief"
[103]: {{page.q}}=8881  "dolour (n.): sorrow, grief, lamentation"
[104]: {{page.q}}=10191  "ending (adj.): dying, near one's end"

**PROTEUS**

Cease to lament for that thou canst not help,
And [study][105] help for that which thou lamentest.
Time is the nurse and breeder of all good;
Here, if thou stay, thou canst not see thy love;
Besides, thy staying will [abridge][106] thy life.
Hope is a lover's staff; walk hence with that,
And [manage][107] it against despairing thoughts.
Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence,
Which, being writ to me, shall be delivered
Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love.
The time now serves not to [expostulate][108].
Come I'll convey thee through the city gate;
And, ere I part with thee, confer at large
Of all that may concern thy love affairs.
As thou lovest Silvia, though not for thyself,
[Regard][109] thy danger, and along with me.

[105]: {{page.q}}=15066  "study (v.) 1: deliberate, meditate, reflect [on]"
[106]: {{page.q}}=518  "abridge (v.) 1: shorten, cut short"
[107]: {{page.q}}=10708  "manage (v.) 1: wield, handle, use"
[108]: {{page.q}}=9673  "expostulate (v.) 1: expound, debate, discourse"
[109]: {{page.q}}=16824  "regard (v.) 1: take note of, pay heed to, value"

**VALENTINE**

I pray thee, Launce, an if thou seest my boy,
Bid him make haste and meet me at the Northgate.


**PROTEUS**

Go, sirrah, find him out. Come, Valentine.


**VALENTINE**

O my dear Silvia! Hapless Valentine!
Exeunt Valentine and Proteus


**LAUNCE**

I am but a fool, look you, and yet I have the [wit][110] to
think my master is a kind of a [knave][111]; but that's all one
if he be but one knave. He lives not now that knows me
to be in love; yet I am in love; but a team of horse shall
not pluck that from me; nor who 'tis I love; and yet 'tis
a woman; but what woman I will not tell myself; and
yet 'tis a milkmaid; yet 'tis not a maid, for she hath had
[gossip][112]s; yet 'tis a maid, for she is her master's maid and
serves for wages. She hath more [qualities][113] than a
water-spaniel – which is much in a bare Christian.
He produces a paper
Here is the [cate-log][114] of her [condition][115]. [Imprimis][116]: She can
fetch and carry. Why, a horse can do no more; nay, a
horse cannot fetch, but only carry; therefore is she better
than a [jade][118]. [Item][117]: She can milk. Look you, a sweet
virtue in a maid with clean hands.
Enter Speed

[110]: {{page.q}}=7583  "wit (n.) 1: intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[111]: {{page.q}}=18989  "knave (n.) 1: scoundrel, rascal, rogue"
[112]: {{page.q}}=17707  "gossip (n.) 1: godparent, baptismal sponsor"
[113]: {{page.q}}=13854  "quality (n.) 2: accomplishment, capacity, ability"
[114]: {{page.q}}=4219  "cate-log (n.): [idiosyncratic pronunciation of] catalogue, inventory, register"
[115]: {{page.q}}=3031  "condition (n.) 2: quality, behaviour, attribute, habit"
[116]: {{page.q}}=5126  "imprimis (adv.): in the first place"
[117]: {{page.q}}=5127  "item (n.) 2: [legal] particular point"
[118]: {{page.q}}=18843  "jade (n.) 1: worn-out horse, hack, worthless nag"

**SPEED**

How now, Signior Launce? What news with your
[mastership][119]?

[119]: {{page.q}}=10575  "mastership (n.): [ironic use] senior citizen, leading light"

**LAUNCE**

With my master's ship? Why, it is at sea.


**SPEED**

Well, your old vice [still][120]: mistake the word. What
news, then, in your paper?

[120]: {{page.q}}=14556  "still (adv.) 2: ever, now [as before]"

**LAUNCE**

The blackest news that ever thou heardest.


**SPEED**

Why, man? How black?


**LAUNCE**

Why, as black as ink.


**SPEED**

Let me read them.


**LAUNCE**

Fie on thee, [jolt-head][121]; thou canst not read.

[121]: {{page.q}}=18961  "jolthead, jolt-head (n.): blockhead, dolt, numskull"

**SPEED**

Thou liest; I can.


**LAUNCE**

I will try thee. Tell me this: who [begot][122] thee?

[122]: {{page.q}}=1437  "beget (v.), past form begot 1: give birth to, father, conceive"

**SPEED**

Marry, the son of my grandfather.


**LAUNCE**

O illiterate [loiterer][123]! It was the son of thy grandmother.
This proves that thou canst not read.

[123]: {{page.q}}=19553  "loiterer (n.): idler, layabout, vagabond"

**SPEED**

Come, fool, come; try me in thy paper.


**LAUNCE**

There; and Saint Nicholas be thy [speed][124]!
He hands over the paper from which Speed reads

[124]: {{page.q}}=16002  "speed (n.) 2: assistance, aid, protector"

**SPEED**

Imprimis: She can milk.


**LAUNCE**

Ay, that she can.


**SPEED**

Item: She brews good ale.


**LAUNCE**

And thereof comes the proverb: ‘ Blessing of
your heart, you brew good ale.’


**SPEED**

Item: She can sew.


**LAUNCE**

That's as much as to say, ‘ Can she so?’


**SPEED**

Item: She can knit.


**LAUNCE**

What need a man care for a [stock][125] with a [wench][126],
when she can knit him a [stock][127]?

[125]: {{page.q}}=15595  "stock (n.) 5: dowry, wedding endowment"
[126]: {{page.q}}=7615  "wench (n.): girl, lass"
[127]: {{page.q}}=15596  "stock (n.) 3: stocking"

**SPEED**

Item: She can wash and scour.


**LAUNCE**

A special virtue; for then she need not be
washed and scoured.


**SPEED**

Item: She can spin.


**LAUNCE**

Then may I set the world [on][128] wheels, when she
can spin for her living.

[128]: {{page.q}}=8014  "wheels, on: running smoothly, providing an easy life"

**SPEED**

Item: She hath many [nameless][129] virtues.

[129]: {{page.q}}=11471  "nameless (adj.) 1: inexpressible, beyond words; or: too small to be worth describing"

**LAUNCE**

That's as much as to say, [bastard][130] virtues; that
indeed know not their fathers, and therefore have no
names.

[130]: {{page.q}}=1681  "bastard (adj.) 2: inferior, low, of little value"

**SPEED**

Here follow her vices.


**LAUNCE**

Close at the heels of her virtues.


**SPEED**

Item: She is not to be kissed fast[in][131]g, in respect of her
breath.

[131]: {{page.q}}=17307  "respect of, in (prep.) 2: on account of"

**LAUNCE**

Well, that fault may be mended with a breakfast.
Read on.


**SPEED**

Item: She hath a [sweet][132] mouth.

[132]: {{page.q}}=15597  "sweet (adj.) 4: wanton, lecherous; or: with a sweet tooth"

**LAUNCE**

That makes amends for her sour breath.


**SPEED**

Item: She doth talk in her sleep.


**LAUNCE**

It's no matter for that; so she sleep not in her
talk.


**SPEED**

Item: She is slow in words.


**LAUNCE**

O villain, that set this down among her vices!
To be slow in words is a woman's only virtue. I pray
thee, out with't, and place it for her chief virtue.


**SPEED**

Item: She is proud.


**LAUNCE**

Out with that too; it was Eve's legacy, and cannot
be ta'en from her.


**SPEED**

Item: She hath no teeth.


**LAUNCE**

I care not for that neither, because I love crusts.


**SPEED**

Item: She is [curst][133].

[133]: {{page.q}}=3144  "curst (adj.) 1: bad-tempered, quarrelsome, shrewish, cross"

**LAUNCE**

Well, the best is, she hath no teeth to bite.


**SPEED**

Item: She will often [praise][134] her liquor.

[134]: {{page.q}}=13206  "praise (v.) 1: appraise, test, try out"

**LAUNCE**

If her liquor be good, she shall; if she will not,
I will; for good things should be praised.


**SPEED**

Item: She is too [liberal][135].

[135]: {{page.q}}=19471  "liberal (adj.) 1: overgenerous, licentious"

**LAUNCE**

Of her tongue she cannot, for that's writ down
she is slow of; of her purse, she shall not, for that I'll
keep shut. Now, of another thing she may, and that
cannot I help. Well, proceed.


**SPEED**

Item: She hath more hair than [wit][136], and more faults
than hairs, and more wealth than faults.

[136]: {{page.q}}=7583  "wit (n.) 1: intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"

**LAUNCE**

Stop there; I'll have her; she was mine and not
mine twice or thrice in that last article. [Rehearse][137] that
once more.

[137]: {{page.q}}=17173  "rehearse (v.) 3: repeat, recite, say over again"

**SPEED**

Item: She hath more hair than wit –


**LAUNCE**

More hair than wit? It may be I'll prove it: the
cover of the salt hides the salt, and therefore it is more
than the salt; the hair that covers the wit is more than
the wit, for the greater hides the less. What's next?


**SPEED**

And more faults than hairs –


**LAUNCE**

That's monstrous. O, that that were out!


**SPEED**

And more wealth than faults.


**LAUNCE**

Why, that word makes the faults [gracious][138]. Well,
I'll have her; an if it be a match, as nothing is
impossible –

[138]: {{page.q}}=17672  "gracious (adj.) 9: delightful, lovely, charming"

**SPEED**

What then?


**LAUNCE**

Why, then will I tell thee – that thy master stays
for thee at the Northgate.


**SPEED**

For me?


**LAUNCE**

For thee! Ay, who art thou? He hath stayed for
a better man than thee.


**SPEED**

And must I go to him?


**LAUNCE**

Thou must run to him, for thou hast [stay][139]ed so
long that [going][140] will scarce serve the turn.

[139]: {{page.q}}=16211  "stay (v.) 2: linger, tarry, delay"
[140]: {{page.q}}=17945  "going (n.): walking, going at one's usual pace"

**SPEED**

Why didst not tell me sooner? Pox of your love
letters!
He returns the paper to Launce. Exit


**LAUNCE**

Now will he be [swinged][141] for reading my letter.
An unmannerly slave, that will thrust himself into
secrets! I'll after, to rejoice in the boy's [correction][142].

Exit

[141]: {{page.q}}=15587  "swinge (v.): beat, thrash, flog"
[142]: {{page.q}}=3061  "correction (n.): punishment, retribution, rebuke"
