---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act III - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
source: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Plays.aspx?Ac=3&SC=2&IdPlay=5
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act3_scene2.html
layout: book_page
tag: [ shakespeare  ]
creation: 1589-1593
date: 2014-03-30 15:44:00 +0800
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

Enter the Duke of Milan and Thurio


**DUKE**

Sir Thurio, fear not but that she will love you
Now Valentine is banished from her sight.


**THURIO**

Since his exile she hath despised me most,
[Forsworn][1] my company, and [rail][2]ed at me,
That I am [desperate][3] of obtaining her.

[1]: {{page.q}}=19977  "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 2: abandon, renounce, reject, give up"
[2]: {{page.q}}=17089  "rail (v.): rant, rave, be abusive [about]"
[3]: {{page.q}}=8398  "desperate (adj.) 1: despairing, hopeless, without hope"

**DUKE**

This weak [impress][5] of love is as a [figure][4]
[Trenched][6] in ice, which with an hour's heat
[Dissolve][7]s to water, and doth lose his [form][8].
A little time will melt her frozen thoughts,
And worthless Valentine shall be forgot.
Enter Proteus
How now, Sir Proteus? Is your countryman,
According to our proclamation, gone?

[4]: {{page.q}}=19923  "figure (n.) 3: copy, image, likeness"
[5]: {{page.q}}=5176  "impress (n.) 2: impression, stamp, sense"
[6]: {{page.q}}=6252  "trenched (adj.) 2: cut, carved, engraved"
[7]: {{page.q}}=9573  "dissolve (v.) 3: melt, liquefy"
[8]: {{page.q}}=19870  "form (n.) 1: image, likeness, shape"

**PROTEUS**

Gone, my good lord.


**DUKE**

My daughter takes his going [grievously][9].

[9]: {{page.q}}=17926  "grievously (adv.) 1: sorrowfully, deeply, with great grief"

**PROTEUS**

A little time, my lord, will kill that grief.


**DUKE**

So I believe; but Thurio thinks not so.
Proteus, the good [conceit][10] I hold of thee –
For thou hast shown some sign of good [desert][11] –
Makes me the [better][12] to confer with thee.

[10]: {{page.q}}=2907  "conceit (n.) 4: view, opinion, judgement"
[11]: {{page.q}}=9234  "desert, desart (n.) 2: worth, merit, deserving"
[12]: {{page.q}}=1693  "better (n.): readier, more willing"

**PROTEUS**

Longer than I prove loyal to your grace
Let me not live to look upon your grace.


**DUKE**

Thou knowest how willingly I would effect
The match between Sir Thurio and my daughter?


**PROTEUS**

I do, my lord.


**DUKE**

And also, I think, thou art not ignorant
How she opposes her against my will?


**PROTEUS**

She did, my lord, when Valentine was here.


**DUKE**

Ay, and perversely she [persever][13]s so.
What might we do to make the girl forget
The love of Valentine, and love Sir Thurio?

[13]: {{page.q}}=12181  "persever (v.) 1: persevere, persist, keep at it"

**PROTEUS**

The best way is to slander Valentine,
With falsehood, cowardice, and poor descent –
Three things that women highly hold in hate.


**DUKE**

Ay, but she'll think that it is spoke in hate.


**PROTEUS**

Ay, if his enemy [deliver][14] it;
Therefore it must with [circumstance][15] be spoken
By one whom she esteemeth as his friend.

[14]: {{page.q}}=9212  "deliver (v.) 1: report [to], communicate [to], tell, describe"
[15]: {{page.q}}=3116  "circumstance (n.) 3: special argument, detailed explanation"

**DUKE**

Then you must undertake to slander him.


**PROTEUS**

And that, my lord, I shall be loath to do:
'Tis an [ill][16] [office][17] for a gentleman,
Especially against his [very][18] friend.

[16]: {{page.q}}=4905  "ill (adj.) 3: poor, inadequate, miserable"
[17]: {{page.q}}=11936  "office (n.) 1: task, service, duty, responsibility"
[18]: {{page.q}}=7346  "very (adj.) 2: true, real, genuine"

**DUKE**

Where your good word cannot [advantage][19] him,
Your slander never can [endamage][20] him;
Therefore the [office][22] is [indifferent][21],
Being entreated to it by your friend.

[19]: {{page.q}}=449  "advantage (v.) 1: benefit, help, aid"
[20]: {{page.q}}=9771  "endamage (v.): damage, injure, harm"
[21]: {{page.q}}=5033  "indifferent (adj.) 1: impartial, unbiased, neutral"
[22]: {{page.q}}=11936  "office (n.) 1: task, service, duty, responsibility"

**PROTEUS**

You have prevailed, my lord; if I can do it
By [aught][23] that I can speak in his [dispraise][24],
She shall not long continue love to him.
But say this [weed][25] her love from Valentine,
It follows not that she will love Sir Thurio.

[23]: {{page.q}}=84  "aught (n.): anything, [with negative word] nothing"
[24]: {{page.q}}=9154  "dispraise (n.): disparagement, censure, reproach"
[25]: {{page.q}}=8015  "weed (v.): [debated usage] weed out, root out"

**THURIO**

Therefore, as you unwind her love from him,
Lest it should [ravel][26], and be good to none,
You must provide to [bottom][27] it on me;
Which must be done by praising me as much
As you in worth [dispraise][28] Sir Valentine.

[26]: {{page.q}}=17174  "ravel (v.): become entangled, get confused"
[27]: {{page.q}}=2252  "bottom (v.) 2: [of wool] wind into a ball; focus, concentrate"
[28]: {{page.q}}=8758  "dispraise (v.): disparage, belittle, denigrate"

**DUKE**

And, Proteus, we dare trust you in this [kind][29],
Because we know, on Valentine's report,
You are already Love's firm [votary][30],
And cannot soon revolt and change your mind.
Upon this [warrant][31] shall you have access
Where you with Silvia may confer [at][32] large –
For she is [lumpish][34], [heavy][33], melancholy,
And, for your friend's sake, will be glad of you –
Where you may [temper][35] her, by your persuasion,
To hate young Valentine and love my friend.

[29]: {{page.q}}=19047  "kind (n.) 4: mode of action, business, matter"
[30]: {{page.q}}=7405  "votary (n.) 1: devotee, disciple, worshipper [of]"
[31]: {{page.q}}=7712  "warrant (n.) 2: licence, sanction, authorization"
[32]: {{page.q}}=19241  "large, at 1: at length, in full, thoroughly"
[33]: {{page.q}}=18220  "heavy (adj.) 1: sorrowful, sad, gloomy"
[34]: {{page.q}}=19554  "lumpish (adj.): despondent, dejected, in low spirits"
[35]: {{page.q}}=6206  "temper (v.) 2: mould, shape, work, bring [to a particular character]"

**PROTEUS**

As much as I can do I will effect.
But you, Sir Thurio, are not [sharp][36] enough;
You must lay [lime][37] to [tangle][38] her desires
By [wailful][40] sonnets, whose [composed][39] rhymes
Should be [full-fraught][41] with [serviceable][42] vows.

[36]: {{page.q}}=15598  "sharp (adj.) 5: ardent, keen, fervent"
[37]: {{page.q}}=19395  "lime (n.) 1: birdlime"
[38]: {{page.q}}=5427  "tangle (v.): trap, snare, enmesh, hold fast"
[39]: {{page.q}}=3545  "composed (adj.): elaborately constructed, well put together"
[40]: {{page.q}}=8016  "wailful (adj.): plaintive, disconsolate, wistful"
[41]: {{page.q}}=20545  "full-fraught (adj.): filled to the brim, jam-packed"
[42]: {{page.q}}=14299  "serviceable (adj.) 1: faithful, loyal, devoted, ready to serve"

**DUKE**

Ay,
Much is the force of heaven-bred [poesy][43].

[43]: {{page.q}}=13207  "poesy (n.): poetry"

**PROTEUS**

Say that upon the altar of her beauty
You sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart;
Write till your ink be dry, and with your tears
Moist it again, and [frame][44] some feeling line
That may [discover][45] such [integrity][46];
For Orpheus' lute was strung with poets' [sinew][47]s,
Whose golden [touch][48] could soften steel and stones,
Make tigers tame, and huge [leviathan][49]s
Forsake [unsounded][50] deeps to dance on sands.
After your [dire-lamenting][51] [elegies][52],
Visit by night your lady's chamber-window
With some sweet [consort][53]; to their instruments
[Tune][56] a [deploring][54] [dump][55] – the night's dead silence
Will well [become][57] such sweet complaining [grievance][58].
This, or else nothing, will [inherit][59] her.

[44]: {{page.q}}=20278  "frame (v.) 1: fashion, make, form, create"
[45]: {{page.q}}=8538  "discover (v.) 1: reveal, show, make known"
[46]: {{page.q}}=5177  "integrity (n.) 2: undivided devotion, wholehearted sincerity"
[47]: {{page.q}}=14781  "sinew (n.) 2: nerve"
[48]: {{page.q}}=5723  "touch (n.) 7: fingering, handling, skill in playing"
[49]: {{page.q}}=19303  "leviathan (n.): sea-monster, whale"
[50]: {{page.q}}=5748  "unsounded (adj.): unfathomed, unexplored, with unrevealed depths"
[51]: {{page.q}}=9178  "dire-lamenting (adj.): deeply sorrowing, dreadfully lamenting"
[52]: {{page.q}}=10091  "elegy (n.): love-poem, song of lamentation"
[53]: {{page.q}}=1179  "consort (n.) 3: company of musicians, ensemble"
[54]: {{page.q}}=9179  "deploring (adj.): mournful, doleful, bewailing"
[55]: {{page.q}}=9155  "dump (n.) 1: plaintive melody, mournful song"
[56]: {{page.q}}=6272  "tune (v.) 1: play"
[57]: {{page.q}}=1432  "become (v.) 1: be fitting, befit, be appropriate to"
[58]: {{page.q}}=17944  "grievance (n.) 1: distress, suffering, pain"
[59]: {{page.q}}=5178  "inherit (v.) 2: secure, win, gain possession of"

**DUKE**

This [discipline][60] shows thou hast been in love.

[60]: {{page.q}}=9180  "discipline (n.) 2: learning, schooling, course of instruction"

**THURIO**

And thy advice this night I'll put in practice;
Therefore, sweet Proteus, my direction-giver,
Let us into the city [presently][61]
To [sort][62] some gentlemen well skilled in music.
I have a sonnet that will serve the turn
To [give][63] the onset to thy good advice.

[61]: {{page.q}}=12248  "presently (adv.) 1: immediately, instantly, at once"
[62]: {{page.q}}=14326  "sort (v.) 2: choose, find, arrange"
[63]: {{page.q}}=11918  "onset, give the: make a beginning with, start acting on"

**DUKE**

About it, gentlemen!


**PROTEUS**

We'll wait upon your grace till after supper,
And [afterward][64] determine our proceedings.

[64]: {{page.q}}=605  "afterward (adv.): afterwards"

**DUKE**

Even now about it! I will [pardon][65] you.
Exeunt

[65]: {{page.q}}=13181  "pardon (v.): excuse, give permission to"
