---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act IV - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
source: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Plays.aspx?Ac=4&SC=1&IdPlay=5
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act4_scene2.html
layout: book_page
tag: [ shakespeare  ]
creation: 1589-1593
date: 2014-04-02 10:06:00 +0800
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---


Enter Proteus


**PROTEUS**

Already have I been [false][1] to Valentine,
And now I must be as unjust to Thurio;
Under the [colour][2] of [commend][3]ing him,
I have access my own love to [prefer][4];
But Silvia is too fair, too true, too [holy][5],
To be corrupted with my worthless gifts.
When I protest true loyalty to her,
She [twit][6]s me with my falsehood to my friend;
When to her beauty I [commend][7] my vows,
She bids me think how I have been [forsworn][8]
In breaking faith with Julia, whom I loved;
And notwithstanding all her [sudden][10] [quip][9]s,
The least whereof would quell a lover's hope,
Yet, [spaniel-like][11], the more she [spurn][12]s my love
The more it grows and fawneth on her still.
Enter Thurio and Musicians
But here comes Thurio. Now must we to her window,
And give some evening music to her ear.

[1]: {{page.q}}=19780  "false (adj.) 1: treacherous, traitorous, perfidious"
[2]: {{page.q}}=2981  "colour (n.) 1: pretext, pretence"
[3]: {{page.q}}=2872  "commend (v.) 4: praise, admire, extol"
[4]: {{page.q}}=12338  "prefer (v.) 1: promote, advance, recommend"
[5]: {{page.q}}=18456  "holy (adj.) 1: virtuous, upright, of great excellence"
[6]: {{page.q}}=6133  "twit (v.): taunt, upbraid, reproach"
[7]: {{page.q}}=3508  "commend (v.) 6: declare, offer, direct"
[8]: {{page.q}}=19872  "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 1: swear falsely, perjure [oneself], break one's word"
[9]: {{page.q}}=13841  "quip (n.): retort, taunt, gibe"
[10]: {{page.q}}=15599  "sudden (adj.) 7: sharp, caustic, biting"
[11]: {{page.q}}=15600  "spaniel-like (adj.): fawningly, slavishly, like a tame dog"
[12]: {{page.q}}=5894  "spurn (v.) 1: reject, scorn, despise, treat with contempt"

**THURIO**

How now, Sir Proteus, are you crept before us?


**PROTEUS**

Ay, [gentle][13] Thurio; for you know that love
Will creep in service where it cannot [go][14].

[13]: {{page.q}}=17495  "gentle (adj.) 1: well-born, honourable, noble"
[14]: {{page.q}}=17754  "go (v.) 1: walk, travel on foot"

**THURIO**

Ay, but I hope, sir, that you love not here.


**PROTEUS**

Sir, but I do; or else I would be hence.


**THURIO**

Who? Silvia?


**PROTEUS**

                  Ay, Silvia – for your sake.


**THURIO**

I thank you for your own. Now, gentlemen,
Let's [tune][16], and to it [lustily][15] awhile.
Enter, some way off, the Host of the Inn, and Julia in
a page's costume

[15]: {{page.q}}=19555  "lustily (adv.): vigorously, heartily, with a will"
[16]: {{page.q}}=6272  "tune (v.) 1: play"

**HOST**

Now, my young guest, [methinks][18] you're [allycholly][17];
I pray you, why is it?

[17]: {{page.q}}=304  "allicholy, allycholly (adj./n.): malapropism for ‘melancholy’"
[18]: {{page.q}}=10439  "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.): it seems /seemed to me"

**JULIA**

Marry, mine host, because I cannot be merry.


**HOST**

Come, we'll have you merry; I'll bring you where
you shall hear music, and see the gentleman that you
asked for.


**JULIA**

But shall I hear him speak?


**HOST**

Ay, that you shall.


**JULIA**

That will be music.
The Musicians play


**HOST**

Hark, hark!


**JULIA**

Is he among these?


**HOST**

Ay; but, peace! Let's hear 'em.
Song
Who is Silvia? What is she,
That all our [swain][20]s [commend][19] her?
[Holy][21], fair, and wise is she;
The heaven such [grace][22] did lend her,
That she might admired be.
Is she [kind][23] as she is fair?
For beauty lives with kindness.
Love doth to her eyes [repair][24],
To help him of his blindness;
And, being helped, inhabits there.
Then to Silvia let us sing
That Silvia is excelling;
She excels each mortal thing
Upon the dull earth dwelling.
To her let us garlands bring.

[19]: {{page.q}}=2872  "commend (v.) 4: praise, admire, extol"
[20]: {{page.q}}=15605  "swain (n.) 4: lover, wooer, sweetheart"
[21]: {{page.q}}=18456  "holy (adj.) 1: virtuous, upright, of great excellence"
[22]: {{page.q}}=17599  "grace (n.) 4: gracefulness, charm, elegance"
[23]: {{page.q}}=19089  "kind (adj.) 4: gracious, full of courtesy"
[24]: {{page.q}}=16609  "repair (v.) 1: come, go, make one's way"

**HOST**

How now? Are you [sad][25]der than you were before?
How do you, man? The music [like][26]s you not.

[25]: {{page.q}}=15557  "sad (adj.) 3: downcast, distressed, mournful, gloomy"
[26]: {{page.q}}=19138  "like (v.) 1: please, suit"

**JULIA**

You mistake; the musician likes me not.


**HOST**

Why, my pretty youth?


**JULIA**

He plays [false][27], father.

[27]: {{page.q}}=20667  "false (adv.) 3: wrongly, erroneously, in error"

**HOST**

How? Out of tune on the strings?


**JULIA**

Not so; but yet so false that he grieves my very
heart-strings.


**HOST**

You have a [quick][28] ear.

[28]: {{page.q}}=13810  "quick (adj.) 4: sharp, keen, alert"

**JULIA**

Ay, I would I were deaf; it makes me have a [slow][29]
heart.

[29]: {{page.q}}=15601  "slow (adj.) 1: heavy, gloomy, dejected"

**HOST**

I perceive you delight not in music.


**JULIA**

Not a whit, when it [jar][30]s so.

[30]: {{page.q}}=18940  "jar (v.) 2: grate, sound discordantly"

**HOST**

Hark, what fine [change][31] is in the music!

[31]: {{page.q}}=4473  "change (n.) 1: variation, modulation"

**JULIA**

Ay; that change is the [spite][32].

[32]: {{page.q}}=14578  "spite (n.) 1: annoyance, vexation, irritation"

**HOST**

You would have them always play but one thing?


**JULIA**

I would always have one play but one thing.
But, host, doth this Sir Proteus, that we talk on,
Often resort unto this gentlewoman?


**HOST**

I tell you what Launce, his man, told me: he loved
her out of all [nick][33].

[33]: {{page.q}}=11472  "nick (n.) 2: reckoning, count, estimation"

**JULIA**

Where is Launce?


**HOST**

Gone to seek his dog, which tomorrow, by his
master's command, he must carry for a present to his
lady.


**JULIA**

Peace! Stand aside; the company [part][34]s.

[34]: {{page.q}}=12396  "part (v.) 1: depart [from], leave, quit"

**PROTEUS**

Sir Thurio, fear not you; I will so plead
That you shall say my cunning [drift][35] excels.

[35]: {{page.q}}=8478  "drift (n.) 1: plan, intention, aim"

**THURIO**

Where meet we?


**PROTEUS**

                  At Saint Gregory's well.


**THURIO**

                                                         Farewell.
Exeunt Thurio and Musicians
Enter Silvia at an upstairs window


**PROTEUS**

Madam, good even to your ladyship.


**SILVIA**

I thank you for your music, gentlemen.
Who is that that spake?


**PROTEUS**

One, lady, if you knew his pure heart's truth,
You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.


**SILVIA**

Sir Proteus, as I take it.


**PROTEUS**

Sir Proteus, [gentle][36] lady, and your servant.

[36]: {{page.q}}=17495  "gentle (adj.) 1: well-born, honourable, noble"

**SILVIA**

What's your [will][38]?

[38]: {{page.q}}=7725  "will (n.) 1: desire, wish, liking, inclination"

**PROTEUS**

                  That I may [compass][37] yours.

[37]: {{page.q}}=3504  "compass (v.) 2: win, obtain, attain"


**SILVIA**

You have your wish; my will is even this,
That [presently][40] you [hie][39] you home to bed.
Thou [subtle][42], perjured, [false][41], disloyal man,
Thinkest thou I am so shallow, so [conceitless][43],
To be seduced by thy flattery
That hast deceived so many with thy vows?
Return, return, and make thy love amends.
For me – by this pale queen of night I swear –
I am so far from granting thy request
That I despise thee for thy wrongful [suit][44];
And by and by intend to [chide][45] myself
Even for this time I spend in talking to thee.

[39]: {{page.q}}=18172  "hie (v.): hasten, hurry, speed"
[40]: {{page.q}}=12248  "presently (adv.) 1: immediately, instantly, at once"
[41]: {{page.q}}=19969  "false (adj.) 2: disloyal, faithless, inconstant, unfaithful"
[42]: {{page.q}}=15065  "subtle, subtile (adj.) 1: crafty, cunning, wily"
[43]: {{page.q}}=3509  "conceitless (adj.): dense, witless, unintelligent"
[44]: {{page.q}}=14962  "suit (n.) 2: wooing, courtship"
[45]: {{page.q}}=4299  "chide (v.), past form chid 1: scold, rebuke, reprove"
[46]: {{page.q}}=4464  "chide (v.), past form chid 4: brusquely command, drive [away] with harsh words"

**PROTEUS**

I grant, sweet love, that I did love a lady,
But she is dead.


**JULIA**

                   (aside) 'Twere false, if I should speak it;
For I am sure she is not buried.


**SILVIA**

Say that she be; yet Valentine thy friend
Survives, to whom, thyself art witness,
I am betrothed; and art thou not ashamed
To wrong him with thy [importunacy][47]?

[47]: {{page.q}}=5191  "importunacy (n.): importunity, urgent solicitation, pressing entreaty"

**PROTEUS**

I likewise hear that Valentine is dead.


**SILVIA**

And so suppose am I; for in his grave
Assure thyself my love is buried.


**PROTEUS**

Sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth.


**SILVIA**

Go to thy lady's grave and call hers thence;
Or, at the least, in hers [sepulchre][48] thine.

[48]: {{page.q}}=15640  "sepulchre (v.) 1: place in a sepulchre, bury"

**JULIA**

(aside)
He heard not that.


**PROTEUS**

Madam, if your heart be so obdurate,
Vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love,
The picture that is hanging in your chamber;
To that I'll speak, to that I'll sigh and weep;
For since the [substance][51] of your [perfect][50] self
Is [else][52] [devoted][49], I am but a [shadow][53];
And to your [shadow][54] will I make true love.

[49]: {{page.q}}=9099  "devoted (adj.) 2: holy, consecrated, dedicated"
[50]: {{page.q}}=12982  "perfect (adj.) 10: complete, flawless, unblemished"
[51]: {{page.q}}=14328  "substance (n.) 1: real thing, genuine article"
[52]: {{page.q}}=10358  "else (adv.) 2: elsewhere, in another direction"
[53]: {{page.q}}=14715  "shadow (n.) 5: spirit, phantom, spectre, ghost"
[54]: {{page.q}}=14327  "shadow (n.) 1: image, likeness, portrait, semblance"

**JULIA**

(aside)
If 'twere a substance, you would sure deceive it
And make it but a [shadow][55], as I am.

[55]: {{page.q}}=15593  "shadow (n.) 4: illusion, unreal image, delusion"

**SILVIA**

I am very loath to be your idol, sir;
But, since your falsehood shall [become][56] you well
To worship shadows and adore [false][57] shapes,
Send to me in the morning and I'll send it;
And so, good rest.

[56]: {{page.q}}=1432  "become (v.) 1: be fitting, befit, be appropriate to"
[57]: {{page.q}}=19980  "false (adj.) 3: sham, spurious, not genuine, artificial"

**PROTEUS**

                  As wretches have o'ernight
That wait for execution in the [morn][58].
Exeunt Proteus and Silvia

[58]: {{page.q}}=10474  "morn (n.): morning, dawn"

**JULIA**

Host, will you go?


**HOST**

By my halidom, I was fast asleep.


**JULIA**

Pray you, where [lie][59]s Sir Proteus?

[59]: {{page.q}}=19245  "lie (v.) 1: live, dwell, reside, lodge"

**HOST**

Marry, at my [house][60]. Trust me, I think 'tis almost day.

[60]: {{page.q}}=18342  "house (n.) 1: inn, tavern"

**JULIA**

Not so; but it hath been the longest night
That e'er I [watch][62]ed, and the most [heaviest][61].
Exeunt

[61]: {{page.q}}=18220  "heavy (adj.) 1: sorrowful, sad, gloomy"
[62]: {{page.q}}=7558  "watch (v.) 1: stay awake, keep vigil"
