---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act IV - Scene IV
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 14:10:56 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act4_scene4.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1589-1593
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Launce, with his dog_

**LAUNCE**

When a man's servant shall play the cur with
him, look you, it goes hard – one that I brought up of a
puppy; one that I saved from drowning, when three or
four of his blind brothers and sisters went [to][1] it. I have
taught him, even as one would say precisely, ‘ Thus I
would teach a dog.’ I was sent to deliver him as a present
to Mistress Silvia from my master; and I came no sooner
into the dining-chamber, but he steps me to her
[trencher][3] and steals her [capon][2]'s leg. O, 'tis a foul thing
when a cur cannot [keep][4] himself in all companies! I
would have, as one should say, one that takes upon him
to be a [dog][5] indeed, to be, as it were, a [dog][5] at all things.
If I had not had more [wit][7] than he, to take a [fault][6] upon
me that he did, I think [verily][8] he had been hanged for't;
sure as I live, he had suffered for't. You shall judge. He
thrusts me himself into the company of three or four
gentlemanlike dogs under the Duke's table; he had not
been there, bless the mark, a [pissing][9] while but all the
chamber smelt him. ‘ Out with the dog!’ says one;
‘ What cur is that?’ says another; ‘ Whip him out,’ says
the third; ‘ Hang him up,’ says the Duke. I, having been
acquainted with the smell before, knew it was Crab, and
goes me to the fellow that whips the dogs. ‘ Friend,’
[quoth][10] I, ‘ you mean to whip the dog?’ ‘ Ay, marry, do I,’
quoth he. ‘ You do him the more wrong,’ quoth I,
‘ 'twas I did the thing you [wot][11] of.’ He makes me no
more ado, but whips me out of the chamber. How many
masters would do this for his servant? Nay, I'll be
sworn, I have sat in the stocks for [pudding][12]s he hath
stolen, otherwise he had been executed; I have stood on
the pillory for geese he hath killed, otherwise he had
suffered for't. Thou thinkest not of this now. Nay, I
remember the trick you served me when I took my leave
of Madam Silvia. Did not I bid thee [still][14] [mark][13] me and
do as I do? When didst thou see me heave up my leg
and make water against a gentlewoman's [farthingale][15]?
Didst thou ever see me do such a trick?
_Enter Proteus, and Julia in a page's costume_

[1]: {{page.q}}=5629 "to it, to't:  to the test, to death"
[2]: {{page.q}}=3933 "capon (n.) 1:  chicken, castrated cockerel [bred for eating]"
[3]: {{page.q}}=5660 "trencher (n.):  plate, platter, serving dish"
[4]: {{page.q}}=19048 "keep (v.) 11:  restrain, control, discipline"
[5]: {{page.q}}=9156 "dog at, be a:  be adept at, be experienced in"
[6]: {{page.q}}=20392 "fault (n.) 2:  mistake, error, blunder"
[7]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[8]: {{page.q}}=7247 "verily (adv.):  in truth, truly, indeed"
[9]: {{page.q}}=13208 "pissing while:  a very short time; also: with enough time to urinate"
[10]: {{page.q}}=13725 "quoth (v.):  said"
[11]: {{page.q}}=7655 "wot (v.) 1:  learn, know, be told"
[12]: {{page.q}}=13212 "pudding (n.) 1:  type of large savoury dish; dumpling, pasty"
[13]: {{page.q}}=10405 "mark (v.) 1:  note, pay attention [to], take notice [of]"
[14]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"
[15]: {{page.q}}=20205 "farthingale (n.):  long skirt extended at the back by a framework of hoops"


**PROTEUS**

Sebastian is thy name? I like thee well,
And will employ thee in some service [presently][16].

[16]: {{page.q}}=12248 "presently (adv.) 1:  immediately, instantly, at once"


**JULIA**

In what you please; I will do what I can.



**PROTEUS**

I hope thou wilt. (To Launce) How now, you whoreson peasant!
Where have you been these two days loitering?



**LAUNCE**

Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you
bade me.



**PROTEUS**

And what says she to my little jewel?



**LAUNCE**

Marry, she says your dog was a cur, and tells you
[currish][17] thanks is good enough for such a present.

[17]: {{page.q}}=3499 "currish (adj.):  mean-spirited, snarling, quarrelsome"


**PROTEUS**

But she received my dog?



**LAUNCE**

No, indeed, did she not; here have I brought
him back again.



**PROTEUS**

What, didst thou offer her this from me?



**LAUNCE**

Ay, sir; the other squirrel was stolen from me by
the [hangman][18] boys in the market-place; and then I
offered her mine own, who is a dog as big as ten of
yours, and therefore the gift the greater.

[18]: {{page.q}}=18601 "hangman (adj.):  fit for the hangman, infernal, diabolical"


**PROTEUS**

Go get thee hence and find my dog again,
Or ne'er return again into my sight.
Away, I say! Stayest thou to vex me here?
_Exit Launce_
A slave that [[still][20]][19] an end [turn][21]s me to shame!
Sebastian, I have [entertain][22]ed thee,
Partly that I have need of such a youth
That can with some discretion do my business,
For 'tis no trusting to yond foolish lout;
But chiefly for thy face and thy behaviour,
Which, if my [augury][23] deceive me not,
Witness good bringing up, fortune, and truth;
Therefore, know thou, for this I [entertain][24] thee.
Go [presently][25], and take this ring with thee,
Deliver it to Madam Silvia –
She loved me well [deliver][26]ed it to me.

[19]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"
[20]: {{page.q}}=15602 "still an end:  repeatedly, time and again, over and over"
[21]: {{page.q}}=5972 "turn (v.) 10:  bring, put"
[22]: {{page.q}}=9927 "entertain (v.) 5:  hire, employ, maintain, take into service"
[23]: {{page.q}}=563 "augury (n.) 2:  discernment, prescience, prophetic skill"
[24]: {{page.q}}=9927 "entertain (v.) 5:  hire, employ, maintain, take into service"
[25]: {{page.q}}=12248 "presently (adv.) 1:  immediately, instantly, at once"
[26]: {{page.q}}=8651 "deliver (v.) 4:  hand over, convey, commit to the keeping [of someone]"


**JULIA**

It seems you loved not her, to [leave][27] her token.
She is dead, [belike][28]?

[27]: {{page.q}}=19271 "leave (v.) 2:  abandon, forsake, relinquish"
[28]: {{page.q}}=1442 "belike (adv.):  probably, presumably, perhaps, so it seems"


**PROTEUS**

Not so; I think she lives.



**JULIA**

Alas!



**PROTEUS**

Why dost thou cry ‘ Alas ’?



**JULIA**

I cannot choose
But pity her.



**PROTEUS**

Wherefore shouldst thou pity her?



**JULIA**

Because [methinks][29] that she loved you as well
As you do love your lady Silvia.
She dreams on him that has forgot her love;
You [dote][30] on her that cares not for your love;
'Tis pity love should be so contrary;
And thinking on it makes me cry ‘ Alas!’

[29]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[30]: {{page.q}}=8462 "dote on / upon (v.) 1:  be infatuated with, idolize"


**PROTEUS**

Well, give her that ring, and therewithal
This letter. That's her chamber. Tell my lady
I claim the promise for her heavenly picture.
Your message done, [hie][31] home unto my chamber,
Where thou shalt find me [sad][32] and solitary.
_Exit_

[31]: {{page.q}}=18172 "hie (v.):  hasten, hurry, speed"
[32]: {{page.q}}=15557 "sad (adj.) 3:  downcast, distressed, mournful, gloomy"


**JULIA**

How many women would do such a message?
Alas, poor Proteus, thou hast [entertain][33]ed
A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.
Alas, poor fool, why do I pity him
That with his very heart despiseth me?
Because he loves her, he despiseth me;
Because I love him, I must pity him.
This ring I gave him, when he parted from me,
To bind him to remember my good will;
And now am I, unhappy messenger,
To plead for that which I would not obtain,
To carry that which I would have refused,
To praise his faith, which I would have dispraised.
I am my master's true-confirmed love,
But cannot be true servant to my master,
Unless I prove [false][34] traitor to myself.
Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly
As, heaven it knows, I would not have him [speed][35].
_Enter Silvia with Attendants_
Gentlewoman, good day! I pray you, be my mean
To bring me where to speak with Madam Silvia.

[33]: {{page.q}}=9927 "entertain (v.) 5:  hire, employ, maintain, take into service"
[34]: {{page.q}}=19780 "false (adj.) 1:  treacherous, traitorous, perfidious"
[35]: {{page.q}}=14731 "speed (v.) 1:  meet with success, prosper, flourish"


**SILVIA**

What would you with her, if that I be she?



**JULIA**

If you be she, I do entreat your patience
To hear me speak the message I am sent on.



**SILVIA**

From whom?



**JULIA**

From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.



**SILVIA**

O, he sends you for a picture.



**JULIA**

Ay, madam.



**SILVIA**

Ursula, bring my picture there.
_Exit one of the Attendants. She returns with a portrait_
_of Silvia_
Go, give your master this. Tell him from me,
One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget,
Would better fit his chamber than this [shadow][36].

[36]: {{page.q}}=14327 "shadow (n.) 1:  image, likeness, portrait, semblance"


**JULIA**

Madam, please you peruse this letter –
Pardon me, madam; I have [unadvised][37]
Delivered you a paper that I should not.
_Julia takes back the letter she offers and gives Silvia_
_another one_
This is the letter to your ladyship.

[37]: {{page.q}}=6980 "unadvised (adv.) 1:  accidentally, inadvertently, thoughtlessly"


**SILVIA**

I pray thee let me look on that again.



**JULIA**

It may not be; good madam, pardon me.



**SILVIA**

There, hold!
_She tears the letter_
I will not look upon your master's lines.
I know they are stuffed with protestations,
And full of [new-found][38] oaths, which he will break
As easily as I do tear his paper.

[38]: {{page.q}}=11473 "new-found (adj.):  recently invented, freshly created"


**JULIA**

Madam, he sends your ladyship this ring.



**SILVIA**

The more shame for him that he sends it me;
For I have heard him say a thousand times
His Julia gave it him, at his departure.
Though his [false][39] finger have profaned the ring,
Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong.

[39]: {{page.q}}=19969 "false (adj.) 2:  disloyal, faithless, inconstant, unfaithful"


**JULIA**

She thanks you.



**SILVIA**

What sayest thou?



**JULIA**

I thank you, madam, that you [tender][40] her.
Poor gentlewoman! My master wrongs her much.

[40]: {{page.q}}=5443 "tender (v.) 2:  feel concern for, hold dear, care for"


**SILVIA**

Dost thou know her?



**JULIA**

Almost as well as I do know myself.
To think upon her woes, I do protest
That I have wept a hundred [several][41] times.

[41]: {{page.q}}=13898 "several (adj.) 1:  separate, different, distinct"


**SILVIA**

[Belike][42] she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her.

[42]: {{page.q}}=1442 "belike (adv.):  probably, presumably, perhaps, so it seems"


**JULIA**

I think she doth, and that's her cause of sorrow.



**SILVIA**

Is she not [passing][43] fair?

[43]: {{page.q}}=12159 "passing (adv.):  very, exceedingly, extremely"


**JULIA**

She hath been fairer, madam, than she is.
When she did think my master loved her well,
She, in my [judgement][44], was as fair as you;
But since she did neglect her looking-glass
And threw her [sun-expelling][45] mask away,
The air hath [starve][46]d the roses in her cheeks
And [pinch][48]ed the [lily-tincture][47] of her face,
That now she is become as [black][49] as I.

[44]: {{page.q}}=18946 "judgement (n.) 1:  opinion, estimation, assessment"
[45]: {{page.q}}=15603 "sun-expelling (adj.):  protecting against the sun [to preserve facial beauty]"
[46]: {{page.q}}=16052 "starve (v.) 5:  destroy, wither, waste away"
[47]: {{page.q}}=19556 "lily-tincture (n.):  lily-white colouring"
[48]: {{page.q}}=13235 "pinch (v.) 4:  wear away, eat into, corrode"
[49]: {{page.q}}=2163 "black (adj.) 1:  dark-complexioned, swarthy"


**SILVIA**

How tall was she?



**JULIA**

About my stature; for, at Pentecost,
When all our pageants of delight were played,
Our youth got me to play the woman's part
And I was [trim][50]med in Madam Julia's gown,
Which [serve][51]d me as fit, by all men's judgements,
As if the garment had been made for me;
Therefore I know she is about my height.
And at that time I made her weep [agood][52],
For I did play a lamentable part.
Madam, 'twas Ariadne [passion][53]ing
For Theseus' perjury and [unjust][54] flight;
Which I so lively acted with my tears
That my poor mistress, moved therewithal,
Wept bitterly; and would I might be dead
If I in thought felt not her very sorrow.

[50]: {{page.q}}=6256 "trim (v.) 1:  dress, attire, make [oneself] ready"
[51]: {{page.q}}=13966 "serve (v.) 4:  be of use, render service, be an advantage [to]"
[52]: {{page.q}}=564 "agood (adv.):  in earnest, in a heartfelt way"
[53]: {{page.q}}=5878 "passion (v.):  experience deep feeling, be profoundly moved, grieve"
[54]: {{page.q}}=6713 "unjust (adj.) 2:  unfaithful, false [to honour]"


**SILVIA**

She is [beholding][55] to thee, [gentle][56] youth.
Alas, poor lady, desolate and left!
I weep myself, to think upon thy words.
Here, youth; there is my purse; I give thee this
For thy sweet mistress' sake, because thou lovest her.
Farewell.
_Exeunt Silvia and attendants_

[55]: {{page.q}}=1588 "beholding (adj.):  beholden, obliged, indebted"
[56]: {{page.q}}=17496 "gentle (adj.) 2:  courteous, friendly, kind"


**JULIA**

And she shall thank you for't, if e'er you know her.
A virtuous gentlewoman, mild, and beautiful!
I hope my master's [suit][58] will be but [cold][57],
Since she respects my mistress' love so much.
Alas, how love can trifle with itself!
Here is her picture; let me see. I think
If I had such a [tire][59] this face of mine
Were full as lovely as is this of hers;
And yet the painter flattered her a little,
Unless I flatter with myself too much.
Her hair is [auburn][60], mine is perfect yellow;
If that be all the difference in his love,
I'll get me such a coloured [periwig][61].
Her eyes are [grey][62] as glass, and so are mine;
Ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high.
What should it be that he [respect][63]s in her
But I can make [respective][64] in myself,
If this [fond][65] Love were not a blinded god?
Come, [shadow][66], come, and take this [shadow][67] up,
For 'tis thy rival. O, thou [senseless][68] form,
Thou shalt be worshipped, kissed, loved, and adored!
And were there sense in his idolatry,
My [substance][69] should be statue in thy stead.
I'll [use][70] thee kindly for thy mistress' sake,
That used me so; or else, by Jove I vow,
I should have scratched out your unseeing eyes,
To make my master out of love with thee!
_Exit_

[57]: {{page.q}}=3510 "cold (adj.) 5:  ineffective, unattended to, coldly received"
[58]: {{page.q}}=14962 "suit (n.) 2:  wooing, courtship"
[59]: {{page.q}}=5954 "tire (n.) 1:  head-dress, ornament for the head, raiment"
[60]: {{page.q}}=124 "auburn (adj.):  yellow-brown, light brown"
[61]: {{page.q}}=12533 "periwig (n.):  wig"
[62]: {{page.q}}=17927 "grey (adj.) 3:  [of eyes] grey-blue, blue-tinged"
[63]: {{page.q}}=17170 "respect (v.) 3:  value, have regard for, prize"
[64]: {{page.q}}=17177 "respective (adj.) 2:  worthy of respect, estimable, inspiring admiration"
[65]: {{page.q}}=19981 "fond (adj.) 4:  infatuated, doting, passionate"
[66]: {{page.q}}=14327 "shadow (n.) 1:  image, likeness, portrait, semblance"
[67]: {{page.q}}=15593 "shadow (n.) 4:  illusion, unreal image, delusion"
[68]: {{page.q}}=13958 "senseless (adj.) 1:  lacking human sensation, incapable of feeling"
[69]: {{page.q}}=14328 "substance (n.) 1:  real thing, genuine article"
[70]: {{page.q}}=7006 "use (v.) 2:  treat, deal with, manage"
