---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act IV - Scene III
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 14:07:27 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act4_scene3.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1589-1593
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Eglamour_

**EGLAMOUR**

This is the hour that Madam Silvia
Entreated me to call and know her mind;
There's some great matter she'd employ me in.
Madam, madam!
_Enter Silvia at an upstairs window_



**SILVIA**

Who calls?



**EGLAMOUR**

Your servant and your friend;
One that [attend][1]s your ladyship's command.

[1]: {{page.q}}=78 "attend (v.) 1:  await, wait for, expect"


**SILVIA**

Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good [morrow][2].

[2]: {{page.q}}=10890 "morrow (n.):  morning"


**EGLAMOUR**

As many, worthy lady, to yourself!
According to your ladyship's [impose][3],
I am thus early come, to know what service
It is your pleasure to command me in.

[3]: {{page.q}}=5179 "impose (n.):  imposition, command, imposed duty"


**SILVIA**

O Eglamour, thou art a gentleman –
Think not I flatter, for I swear I do not –
Valiant, wise, [remorseful][4], well-accomplished.
Thou art not ignorant what [dear][5] good will
I bear unto the banished Valentine;
Nor how my father would enforce me marry
[Vain][6] Thurio, whom my very soul abhors.
Thyself hast loved, and I have heard thee say
No grief did ever come so near thy heart
As when thy lady and thy true love died,
Upon whose grave thou vowedst pure chastity.
Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine,
To Mantua, where I hear he makes [abode][7];
And, for the ways are dangerous to pass,
I do desire thy worthy company,
Upon whose faith and honour I [repose][8].
[Urge][9] not my father's anger, Eglamour,
But think upon my grief, a lady's grief,
And on the justice of my flying hence,
To keep me from a most unholy match,
Which heaven and fortune [still][10] rewards with plagues.
I do desire thee, even from a heart
As full of sorrows as the sea of sands,
To bear me company and go with me;
If not, to hide what I have said to thee,
That I may venture to depart alone.

[4]: {{page.q}}=17176 "remorseful (adj.) 2:  compassionate, caring, full of pity"
[5]: {{page.q}}=8759 "dear (adj.) 6:  heartfelt, earnest, zealous"
[6]: {{page.q}}=7274 "vain (adj.) 1:  foolish, silly, stupid"
[7]: {{page.q}}=664 "abode (n.) 3:  dwelling-place, lodging, residence"
[8]: {{page.q}}=17162 "repose (v.):  confidently settle, happily rely"
[9]: {{page.q}}=6763 "urge (v.) 6:  provoke, incite, impel"
[10]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"


**EGLAMOUR**

Madam, I pity much your [grievance][11]s;
Which since I know they virtuously are placed,
I give consent to go along with you,
[Reck][13]ing as little what [betide][12]th me
As much I wish all good [befortune][14] you.
When will you go?

[11]: {{page.q}}=17944 "grievance (n.) 1:  distress, suffering, pain"
[12]: {{page.q}}=1582 "betide (v.) 1:  happen (to), befall, come (to)"
[13]: {{page.q}}=16581 "reck (v.):  regard, heed, care [for]"
[14]: {{page.q}}=1682 "befortune (v.):  befall, happen, come upon"


**SILVIA**

This evening coming.



**EGLAMOUR**

Where shall I meet you?



**SILVIA**

At Friar Patrick's cell,
Where I intend holy confession.



**EGLAMOUR**

I will not fail your ladyship. Good morrow,
[gentle][15] lady.

[15]: {{page.q}}=17495 "gentle (adj.) 1:  well-born, honourable, noble"


**SILVIA**

Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.
_Exeunt_

