---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act V - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 14:18:06 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act5_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1589-1593
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Thurio, Proteus, and Julia dressed in a page's_

_costume_

**THURIO**

Sir Proteus, what says Silvia to my [suit][1]?

[1]: {{page.q}}=14962 "suit (n.) 2:  wooing, courtship"


**PROTEUS**

O, sir, I find her milder than she was;
And yet she takes [exception][2]s at your person.

[2]: {{page.q}}=10076 "exception (n.) 1:  (often plural) objection, dislike, disapproval"


**THURIO**

What? That my leg is too long?



**PROTEUS**

No, that it is too [little][3].

[3]: {{page.q}}=15346 "little (adj.) 3:  thin, lean, skinny"


**THURIO**

I'll wear a [boot][4] to make it somewhat rounder.

[4]: {{page.q}}=2254 "boot (n.) 5:  riding-boot"


**JULIA**

_aside_
But love will not be spurred to what it loathes.



**THURIO**

What says she to my face?



**PROTEUS**

She says it is a [fair][5] one.

[5]: {{page.q}}=20546 "fair (adj.) 3:  pale, of light complexion"


**THURIO**

Nay then, the [wanton][7] lies; my face is [black][6].

[6]: {{page.q}}=2163 "black (adj.) 1:  dark-complexioned, swarthy"
[7]: {{page.q}}=7759 "wanton (n.) 4:  wilful creature, obstinate individual"


**PROTEUS**

But pearls are fair; and the old saying is:
[Black][8] men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.

[8]: {{page.q}}=2163 "black (adj.) 1:  dark-complexioned, swarthy"


**JULIA**

_aside_
'Tis true, such pearls as put out ladies' eyes;
For I had rather [wink][9] than look on them.

[9]: {{page.q}}=7633 "wink (v.) 1:  shut one's eyes"


**THURIO**

How likes she my [discourse][10]?

[10]: {{page.q}}=8673 "discourse (n.) 1:  conversation, talk, chat"


**PROTEUS**

[Ill][11], when you talk of war.

[11]: {{page.q}}=4953 "ill (adv.) 1:  badly, adversely, unfavourably"


**THURIO**

But well when I [discourse][12] of love and peace?

[12]: {{page.q}}=8513 "discourse (v.) 1:  talk, chat, converse"


**JULIA**

_aside_
But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.



**THURIO**

What says she to my valour?



**PROTEUS**

O, sir, she makes no [doubt][13] of that.

[13]: {{page.q}}=9157 "doubt (n.) 3:  question, difficulty, hesitation [over]"


**JULIA**

_aside_
She needs not, when she knows it cowardice.



**THURIO**

What says she to my birth?



**PROTEUS**

That you are well [derived][14].

[14]: {{page.q}}=8838 "derived (adj.):  descended, in lineage"


**JULIA (aside)**

_aside_
True; from a gentleman to a fool.



**THURIO**

Considers she my possessions?



**PROTEUS**

O, ay; and pities them.



**THURIO**

Wherefore?



**JULIA**

_aside_
That such an ass should owe them.



**PROTEUS**

That they are out by [lease][15].
_Enter the Duke of Milan_

[15]: {{page.q}}=19557 "lease, out by:  let out to others, not under one's full ownership"


**JULIA**

Here comes the Duke.



**DUKE**

How now, Sir Proteus! How now, Thurio!
Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of [late][16]?

[16]: {{page.q}}=19247 "late, of:  recently, a little while ago"


**THURIO**

Not I.



**PROTEUS**

Nor I.



**DUKE**

Saw you my daughter?



**PROTEUS**





**DUKE**

Why then,
She's fled unto that [peasant][17] Valentine;
And Eglamour is in her company.
'Tis true; for Friar Laurence met them both
As he in penance wandered through the forest;
Him he knew well, and guessed that it was she,
But, being masked, he was not sure of it;
Besides, she did intend confession
At Patrick's cell this [even][18]; and there she was not.
These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence;
Therefore, I pray you, [stand][20] not to [discourse][19],
But mount you [presently][21], and meet with me
Upon the rising of the [mountain-foot][22]
That leads towards Mantua, whither they are fled.
[Dispatch][23], sweet gentlemen, and follow me.
_Exit_

[17]: {{page.q}}=12171 "peasant (adj.) 1:  base, low, villainous"
[18]: {{page.q}}=10092 "even (n.) 1:  evening"
[19]: {{page.q}}=8513 "discourse (v.) 1:  talk, chat, converse"
[20]: {{page.q}}=15531 "stand (v.) 8:  waste time, delay, wait"
[21]: {{page.q}}=12248 "presently (adv.) 1:  immediately, instantly, at once"
[22]: {{page.q}}=10984 "mountain-foot (n.):  foothills"
[23]: {{page.q}}=8763 "dispatch, despatch (v.) 4:  hurry up, be quick"


**THURIO**

Why, this it is to be a [peevish][24] girl
That flies her fortune when it follows her.
I'll after, more to be revenged on Eglamour
Than for the love of reckless Silvia.
_Exit_

[24]: {{page.q}}=13294 "peevish (adj.) 2:  obstinate, perverse, self-willed [contrast modern sense of ‘irritable, morose’]"


**PROTEUS**

And I will follow, more for Silvia's love
Than hate of Eglamour, that goes with her.
_Exit_



**JULIA**

And I will follow, more to cross that love
Than hate for Silvia, that is gone for love.
_Exit_

