---
title: The Two Gentlemen of Verona
tagline: Act V - Scene IV
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 14:25:38 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/The_Two_Gentlement_of_Verona_act5_scene4.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1589-1593
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Valentine_

**VALENTINE**

How use doth breed a habit in a man!
This [shadowy][2] [desert][1], unfrequented woods,
I better [brook][3] than flourishing peopled towns.
Here can I sit alone, unseen of any,
And to the nightingale's complaining notes
[Tune][5] my distresses, and [record][4] my woes.
O thou that dost [inhabit][6] in my breast,
Leave not the mansion so long tenantless,
Lest, growing [ruinous][7], the building fall
And leave no memory of what it was!
[Repair][8] me with thy presence, Silvia;
Thou [gentle][10] nymph, [cherish][9] thy forlorn [swain][11].
_Noises within_
What halloing and what stir is this today?
These are my [mate][12]s, that make their wills their law,
Have some unhappy [passenger][14] in [chase][13].
They love me well; yet I have much to do
To keep them from [uncivil][15] outrages.
Withdraw thee, Valentine. Who's this comes here?
_He steps aside_
_Enter Proteus, Silvia, and Julia in a page's costume_

[1]: {{page.q}}=8563 "desert, desart (n.) 5:  desolate place, wilderness"
[2]: {{page.q}}=14721 "shadowy (adj.):  shady, shaded"
[3]: {{page.q}}=1819 "brook (v.) 1:  endure, tolerate, put up with"
[4]: {{page.q}}=17185 "record (v.):  sing, warble, chant"
[5]: {{page.q}}=6608 "tune (v.) 2:  sing, utter, sound out"
[6]: {{page.q}}=5180 "inhabit (v.):  lodge, dwell, reside"
[7]: {{page.q}}=17396 "ruinous (adj.):  ruined, decayed, ravaged"
[8]: {{page.q}}=17227 "repair (v.) 2:  restore, renew, revive"
[9]: {{page.q}}=4434 "cherish (v.) 1:  support, foster, sustain"
[10]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6:  soft, tender, kind"
[11]: {{page.q}}=15605 "swain (n.) 4:  lover, wooer, sweetheart"
[12]: {{page.q}}=10577 "mate (n.) 1:  companion, associate, comrade"
[13]: {{page.q}}=4294 "chase (n.) 1:  pursuit, sequence, hunt"
[14]: {{page.q}}=12622 "passenger (n.):  wayfarer, traveller, passer-by"
[15]: {{page.q}}=6648 "uncivil (adj.):  uncivilized, barbarous, unrefined"


**PROTEUS**

Madam, this service I have done for you,
Though you [respect][17] not [aught][16] your servant doth,
To hazard life, and rescue you from him
That would have forced your honour and your love.
Vouchsafe me, for my [meed][18], but one fair look;
A smaller [boon][19] than this I cannot beg,
And less than this, I am sure, you cannot give.

[16]: {{page.q}}=84 "aught (n.):  anything, [with negative word] nothing"
[17]: {{page.q}}=17170 "respect (v.) 3:  value, have regard for, prize"
[18]: {{page.q}}=10428 "meed (n.) 1:  reward, prize, recompense"
[19]: {{page.q}}=2076 "boon (n.):  petition, entreaty, request"


**VALENTINE**

_aside_
How like a dream is this I see and hear!
Love, lend me patience to [forbear][20] awhile.

[20]: {{page.q}}=20034 "forbear (v.) 3:  control oneself, have patience [for]"


**SILVIA**

O miserable, unhappy that I am!



**PROTEUS**

Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came;
But by my coming I have made you happy.



**SILVIA**

By thy [approach][21] thou makest me most unhappy.

[21]: {{page.q}}=565 "approach (n.) 2:  advances, amorous attention"


**JULIA**

_aside_
And me, when he approacheth to your presence.



**SILVIA**

Had I been seized by a hungry lion,
I would have been a breakfast to the beast,
Rather than have [false][22] Proteus rescue me.
O, heaven be judge how I love Valentine,
Whose life's as tender to me as my soul!
And full as much, for more there cannot be,
I do detest false perjured Proteus.
Therefore be gone; solicit me no more.

[22]: {{page.q}}=19969 "false (adj.) 2:  disloyal, faithless, inconstant, unfaithful"


**PROTEUS**

What dangerous action, stood it next to death,
Would I not undergo for one calm look?
O, 'tis the curse in love, and [still][24] [approve][23]d,
When women cannot love where they're beloved!

[23]: {{page.q}}=40 "approve (v.) 1:  prove, confirm, corroborate, substantiate"
[24]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"


**SILVIA**

When Proteus cannot love where he's beloved!
Read over Julia's heart, thy first best love,
For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith
Into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths
Descended into perjury, to love me.
Thou hast no faith left now, unless thou'dst two,
And that's far worse than none; better have none
Than plural faith, which is too much by one.
Thou [counterfeit][25] to thy true friend!

[25]: {{page.q}}=2914 "counterfeit (n.) 1:  false imitation, spurious image"


**PROTEUS**

In love,
Who [respect][26]s friend?

[26]: {{page.q}}=16897 "respect (v.) 4:  scruple about, have qualms about"


**SILVIA**

All men but Proteus.



**PROTEUS**

Nay, if the [gentle][27] spirit of moving words
Can no way change you to a milder form,
I'll woo you like a soldier, at [arms'][28] end,
And love you 'gainst the nature of love – force ye.

[27]: {{page.q}}=18076 "gentle (adj.) 4:  peaceful, calm, free from violence"
[28]: {{page.q}}=579 "arms' end, at:  at the point of a sword"


**SILVIA**

O heaven!



**PROTEUS**

I'll force thee yield to my desire.
_Valentine steps forward_



**VALENTINE**

Ruffian, let go that rude uncivil touch;
Thou friend of an [ill][30] [fashion][29]!

[29]: {{page.q}}=20341 "fashion (n.) 6:  kind, type, sort"
[30]: {{page.q}}=4897 "ill (adj.) 2:  evil, wicked, immoral"


**PROTEUS**

Valentine!



**VALENTINE**

Thou [common][31] friend that's without faith or love –
For such is a friend now; treacherous man,
Thou hast [beguile][32]d my hopes; naught but mine eye
Could have persuaded me. Now I dare not say
I have one friend alive: thou wouldst disprove me.
Who should be trusted now, when one's right hand
Is perjured to the bosom? Proteus,
I am sorry I must never trust thee more,
But count the world a stranger for thy sake.
The private wound is deepest. O time most accurst!
'Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!

[31]: {{page.q}}=2869 "common (adj.) 1:  average, usual, general, ordinary"
[32]: {{page.q}}=1438 "beguile (v.) 1:  cheat, deceive, trick"


**PROTEUS**

My shame and guilt [confound][33]s me.
Forgive me, Valentine; if hearty sorrow
Be a sufficient ransom for offence,
I [tender][34]'t here; I do as truly suffer
As e'er I did [commit][35].

[33]: {{page.q}}=2707 "confound (v.) 5:  discomfit, defeat, put to shame"
[34]: {{page.q}}=6309 "tender (v.) 1:  offer, give, present"
[35]: {{page.q}}=3511 "commit (v.) 1:  sin, transgress, do wrong"


**VALENTINE**

Then I am paid;
And once again I do [receive][36] thee honest.
Who by repentance is not satisfied
Is nor of heaven nor earth, for these are pleased;
By penitence th' Eternal's wrath's appeased.
And, that my love may appear plain and free,
All that was mine in Silvia I give thee.

[36]: {{page.q}}=16580 "receive (v.) 1:  consider, believe, regard"


**JULIA**

O me unhappy!
_She swoons_



**PROTEUS**

Look to the boy.



**VALENTINE**

Why, boy? Why, [wag][37], how now? What's the
matter? Look up; speak.

[37]: {{page.q}}=7736 "wag (n.):  fellow, lad, mischievous boy"


**JULIA**

O, good sir, my master charged me to deliver a ring
to Madam Silvia, which, out of my neglect, was never
done.



**PROTEUS**

Where is that ring, boy?



**JULIA**

Here 'tis; this is it.
_She offers her own ring_



**PROTEUS**

How? Let me see. Why, this is the ring I gave
to Julia.



**JULIA**

O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook;
This is the ring you sent to Silvia.
_She offers another ring_



**PROTEUS**

But how camest thou by this ring? At my
[depart][38] I gave this unto Julia.

[38]: {{page.q}}=8504 "depart (n.) 1:  departure, departing, leave-taking"


**JULIA**

And Julia herself did give it me;
And Julia herself hath brought it hither.



**PROTEUS**

How? Julia?



**JULIA**

Behold her that gave [aim][39] to all thy oaths,
And entertained 'em deeply in her heart.
How [oft][40] hast thou with perjury cleft the [root][41]!
O Proteus, let this [habit][42] make thee blush!
Be thou ashamed that I have took upon me
Such an immodest raiment, if shame live
In a disguise of love.
It is the lesser [blot][43], modesty finds,
Women to change their [shape][44]s than men their minds.

[39]: {{page.q}}=566 "aim (n.) 2:  target, object, goal"
[40]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.):  often"
[41]: {{page.q}}=17179 "root (n.) 1:  bottom [of one's heart]"
[42]: {{page.q}}=15263 "habit (n.) 1:  dress, clothing, costume"
[43]: {{page.q}}=1071 "blot (n.):  stain, disgrace, blemish"
[44]: {{page.q}}=15733 "shape (n.) 1:  appearance, aspect, visible form"


**PROTEUS**

Than men their minds? 'Tis true. O heaven, were man
But [constant][45], he were perfect! That one error
Fills him with faults; makes him run through all the sins:
Inconstancy falls off ere it begins.
What is in Silvia's face, but I may spy
More fresh in Julia's with a constant eye?

[45]: {{page.q}}=3010 "constant (adj.) 1:  faithful, steadfast, true"


**VALENTINE**

Come, come, a hand from either.
Let me be blest to make this happy [close][46];
'Twere pity two such friends should be long foes.

[46]: {{page.q}}=3512 "close (n.) 1:  union, uniting"


**PROTEUS**

Bear witness, heaven, I have my wish for ever.



**JULIA**

And I mine.
_Enter the Outlaws, with the Duke of Milan and_
_Thurio captives_



**OUTLAWS**

A prize, a prize, a prize!



**VALENTINE**

Forbear,
Forbear, I say! It is my lord the Duke.
Your grace is welcome to a man disgraced,
Banished Valentine.



**DUKE**

Sir Valentine?



**THURIO**

Yonder is Silvia; and Silvia's mine.



**VALENTINE**

Thurio, [give][47] back, or else embrace thy death;
Come not within the [measure][48] of my wrath;
Do not name Silvia thine; if once again,
Verona shall not [hold][49] thee. Here she stands;
Take but possession of her with a touch –
I dare thee but to breathe upon my love.

[47]: {{page.q}}=17928 "give back (v.):  retire, yield, back off"
[48]: {{page.q}}=10985 "measure (n.) 4:  range, reach, scope"
[49]: {{page.q}}=18551 "hold (v.) 2:  keep, preserve, conserve"


**THURIO**

Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I:
I hold him but a fool that will endanger
His body for a girl that loves him not.
I claim her not and therefore she is thine.



**DUKE**

The more degenerate and [base][50] art thou
To make such [means][51] for her as thou hast done,
And leave her on such slight [condition][52]s.
Now, by the honour of my ancestry,
I do applaud thy spirit, Valentine,
And think thee worthy of an empress' love.
Know, then, I here forget all former [grief][53]s,
Cancel all grudge, [repeal][54] thee home again,
Plead a new [state][55] in thy unrivalled merit,
To which I thus [subscribe][56]: Sir Valentine.
Thou art a gentleman, and well [derived][57];
Take thou thy Silvia, for thou hast deserved her.

[50]: {{page.q}}=1412 "base (adj.) 1:  dishonourable, low, unworthy"
[51]: {{page.q}}=10986 "means, make:  take pains, make efforts"
[52]: {{page.q}}=3024 "condition (n.) 6:  settlement, terms, pact"
[53]: {{page.q}}=17529 "grief (n.) 1:  grievance, complaint, hurt, injury"
[54]: {{page.q}}=16845 "repeal (v.):  recall, call back [from exile]"
[55]: {{page.q}}=5904 "state (n.) 1:  condition, circumstances, situation, state of affairs"
[56]: {{page.q}}=16527 "subscribe to (v.) 2:  make acknowledgement of, admit to"
[57]: {{page.q}}=8838 "derived (adj.):  descended, in lineage"


**VALENTINE**

I thank your grace; the gift hath made me happy.
I now beseech you, for your daughter's sake,
To grant one [boom][58] that I shall ask of you.

[58]: {{page.q}}=2076 "boon (n.):  petition, entreaty, request"


**DUKE**

I grant it, for thine own, whate'er it be.



**VALENTINE**

These banished men, that I have [kept][59] withal,
Are men endued with worthy qualities;
Forgive them what they have committed here,
And let them be recalled from their exile:
They are reformed, [civil][60], full of good,
And fit for great employment, worthy lord.

[59]: {{page.q}}=18981 "keep (v.) 1:  lodge, live, dwell"
[60]: {{page.q}}=2642 "civil (adj.) 1:  civilized, cultured, refined"


**DUKE**

Thou hast prevailed; I pardon them and thee;
Dispose of them as thou knowest their [desert][61]s.
Come, let us go; we will [include][62] all [jar][63]s
With [triumph][66]s, mirth, and [rare][64] [solemnity][65].

[61]: {{page.q}}=9234 "desert, desart (n.) 2:  worth, merit, deserving"
[62]: {{page.q}}=5181 "include (v.):  conclude, settle, bring to a close"
[63]: {{page.q}}=18841 "jar (n.) 2:  discord, disharmony, disagreement"
[64]: {{page.q}}=16677 "rare (adj.) 1:  marvellous, splendid, excellent"
[65]: {{page.q}}=14718 "solemnity (n.) 1:  celebration, jubilation, festivity"
[66]: {{page.q}}=5609 "triumph (n.) 1:  public festivity, pageant, display of celebration, tournament"


**VALENTINE**

And, as we walk along, I dare be [bold][67]
With our [discourse][68] to make your grace to smile.
What think you of this page, my lord?

[67]: {{page.q}}=1901 "bold (adj.) 2:  overconfident, presumptuous, audacious, impudent"
[68]: {{page.q}}=8673 "discourse (n.) 1:  conversation, talk, chat"


**DUKE**

I think the boy hath grace in him; he blushes.



**VALENTINE**

I [warrant][69] you, my lord – more grace than boy.

[69]: {{page.q}}=7550 "warrant (v.) 1:  assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"


**DUKE**

What mean you by that saying?



**VALENTINE**

Please you, I'll tell you as we pass along,
That you will [wonder][71] what hath [fortune][70]d.
Come, Proteus, 'tis your penance but to hear
The story of your loves [discover][72]ed.
That done, our day of marriage shall be yours:
One feast, one house, one mutual happiness.
_Exeunt_

[70]: {{page.q}}=20547 "fortune (v.):  happen, chance, occur"
[71]: {{page.q}}=8009 "wonder (v.) 1:  marvel [at], be astonished [at]"
[72]: {{page.q}}=8538 "discover (v.) 1:  reveal, show, make known"
