---
title: A Midsummer Night's Dream
tagline: Act I - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 14:45:46 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/A_Midsummer_Night_Dream_act1_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Philostrate and Attendants_

**THESEUS**

Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
Draws on [apace][1]. Four happy days bring in
Another moon – but O, [methinks][2] how slow
This old moon wanes! She [linger][3]s my desires,
Like to a [stepdame][4] or a dowager
Long [wither][6]ing out a young man's [revenue][5].

[1]: {{page.q}}=139 "apace (adv.):  quickly, speedily, at a great rate"
[2]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[3]: {{page.q}}=19335 "linger (v.) 1:  delay, put off, keep waiting"
[4]: {{page.q}}=14682 "stepdame, step-dame (n.):  stepmother"
[5]: {{page.q}}=16626 "revenue (n.) 1:  income, yield, profit"
[6]: {{page.q}}=7797 "wither out (v.):  cause to dwindle, make less"


**HIPPOLYTA**

Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
Four nights will quickly dream away the time:
And then the moon – like to a silver bow
New-bent in heaven – shall behold the night
Of our solemnities.



**THESEUS**

Go, Philostrate,
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments.
Awake the [pert][7] and nimble spirit of mirth.
Turn melancholy forth to funerals:
The pale [companion][8] is not for our [pomp][9].
_Exit Philostrate_
Hippolyta, I wooed thee with my sword,
And won thy love doing thee injuries;
But I will wed thee in another key:
With pomp, with [triumph][10], and with revelling.
_Enter Egeus and his daughter Hermia, and Lysander, and Demetrius_

[7]: {{page.q}}=12760 "pert (adj.):  lively, brisk, sprightly"
[8]: {{page.q}}=3043 "companion (n.) 1:  rogue, rascal, fellow"
[9]: {{page.q}}=12761 "pomp (n.) 1:  pageant, ceremony, procession"
[10]: {{page.q}}=5609 "triumph (n.) 1:  public festivity, pageant, display of celebration, tournament"


**EGEUS**

Happy be Theseus, our renowned Duke.



**THESEUS**

Thanks, good Egeus. What's the news with thee?



**EGEUS**

Full of vexation come I, with complaint
Against my child, my daughter Hermia.
Stand forth, Demetrius! My noble lord,
This man hath my consent to marry her.
Stand forth, Lysander! – And, my gracious Duke,
This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child.
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes,
And interchanged love-tokens with my child.
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung
With feigning voice verses of feigning love,
And stolen the impression of her [fantasy][11].
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, [gaud][13]s, [conceit][12]s,
[Knack][14]s, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats – messengers
Of strong [prevailment][15] in unhardened youth –
With cunning hast thou filched my daughter's heart,
Turned her obedience which is due to me
To stubborn harshness. And, my gracious Duke,
Be it so she will not here before your grace
Consent to marry with Demetrius,
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:
As she is mine, I may dispose of her;
Which shall be either to this gentleman
Or to her death, according to our law
[Immediately][16] provided in that case.

[11]: {{page.q}}=19788 "fantasy (n.) 5:  ardent desire, amorous fancy"
[12]: {{page.q}}=1141 "conceit (n.) 7:  trinket, fancy article, bauble"
[13]: {{page.q}}=17583 "gaud (n.):  gaudy toy, showy plaything, trinket"
[14]: {{page.q}}=18998 "knack (n.):  trifle, knick-knack, ornament"
[15]: {{page.q}}=12762 "prevailment (n.):  prevailing action, power, influence"
[16]: {{page.q}}=5047 "immediately (adv.):  directly, instantly, without delay"


**THESEUS**

What say you, Hermia? Be advised, fair maid:
To you your father should be as a god;
One that [compose][17]d your beauties – yea, and one
To whom you are but as a form in wax
By him imprinted, and within his power
To leave the figure or disfigure it.
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.

[17]: {{page.q}}=4747 "compose (v.) 1:  make up, produce, fashion"


**HERMIA**

So is Lysander.



**THESEUS**

&nbsp;                         In himself he is;
But in this [kind][18], [wanting][20] your father's [voice][19],
The other must be held the worthier.

[18]: {{page.q}}=18984 "kind (n.) 7:  respect, regard, particular"
[19]: {{page.q}}=7229 "voice (n.) 2:  support, approval, good word"
[20]: {{page.q}}=7539 "want (v.) 1:  lack, need, be without"


**HERMIA**

I would my father looked but with my eyes.



**THESEUS**

Rather your eyes must with his judgement look.



**HERMIA**

I do entreat your grace to pardon me.
I know not by what [power][21] I am made bold,
Nor how it may [concern][22] my modesty
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts;
But I beseech your grace that I may know
The worst that may [befall][23] me in this case
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.

[21]: {{page.q}}=13466 "power (n.) 4:  force, strength, might"
[22]: {{page.q}}=1142 "concern (v.) 3:  befit, suit with, accord with"
[23]: {{page.q}}=1555 "befall (v.), past forms befallen, befell 2:  happen to, come to"


**THESEUS**

Either to die the death, or to abjure
For ever the society of men.
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
[Know][25] of your youth, examine well your [blood][24],
Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice,
You can endure the [livery][27] of a nun,
For [aye][26] to be in shady cloister [mew][28]ed,
To live a barren sister all your life,
Chanting faint hymns to the [cold][29] fruitless moon.
Thrice blessed they that master so their [blood][30]
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage;
But earthlier happy is the rose distilled,
Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn,
Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness.

[24]: {{page.q}}=2296 "blood (n.) 1:  passion, feeling, strong emotion [especially sexual]"
[25]: {{page.q}}=18999 "know (v.) 1:  acknowledge, remember, think [of]"
[26]: {{page.q}}=90 "aye (adv.):  always, ever, for eternity"
[27]: {{page.q}}=19153 "livery (n.) 1:  uniform, costume, special clothing"
[28]: {{page.q}}=10743 "mew (v.):  coop up, confine, shut up"
[29]: {{page.q}}=2656 "cold (adj.) 1:  chaste, modest, lacking sensual passion"
[30]: {{page.q}}=2296 "blood (n.) 1:  passion, feeling, strong emotion [especially sexual]"


**HERMIA**

So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
Ere I will my virgin [patent][31] up
Unto his lordship whose unwished yoke
My soul consents not to give sovereignty.

[31]: {{page.q}}=12763 "patent (n.) 1:  privilege, right, title"


**THESEUS**

Take time to pause, and by the next new moon –
The [sealing][32] day betwixt my love and me
For everlasting bond of fellowship –
Upon that day either prepare to die
For disobedience to your father's will,
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
Or on Diana's altar to protest
For [aye][33] austerity and single life.

[32]: {{page.q}}=16394 "sealing day (n.):  day for confirming a contract, wedding-day"
[33]: {{page.q}}=90 "aye (adv.):  always, ever, for eternity"


**DEMETRIUS**

Relent, sweet Hermia; and, Lysander, yield
Thy [crazed][34] [title][35] to my certain right.

[34]: {{page.q}}=1143 "crazed (adj.):  flawed, unsound, impaired"
[35]: {{page.q}}=6308 "title (n.) 1:  [legal] right, claim, entitlement"


**LYSANDER**

You have her father's love, Demetrius –
Let me have Hermia's. Do you marry him.



**EGEUS**

Scornful Lysander – true, he hath my love;
And what is mine my love shall render him;
And she is mine, and all my right of her
I do [estate][36] unto Demetrius.

[36]: {{page.q}}=9656 "estate (v.):  endow, settle upon, bestow (up)on"


**LYSANDER**

I am, my lord, as well [derived][37] as he,
As well [possessed][38]. My love is more than his,
My fortunes every way as fairly ranked –
If not with [vantage][39] – as Demetrius'.
And – which is more than all these boasts can be –
I am beloved of beauteous Hermia.
Why should not I then prosecute my right?
Demetrius – I'll [avouch][40] it to his [head][41] –
Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,
And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry
Upon this [spotted][42] and inconstant man.

[37]: {{page.q}}=8838 "derived (adj.):  descended, in lineage"
[38]: {{page.q}}=12764 "possessed (adj.) 2:  propertied, affluent, provided for"
[39]: {{page.q}}=7313 "vantage (n.) 2:  advantageous position, place of vantage, superiority"
[40]: {{page.q}}=320 "avouch (v.) 1:  declare, assert, affirm"
[41]: {{page.q}}=18396 "head, to one's:  to one's face, frankly, openly"
[42]: {{page.q}}=14625 "spotted (adj.) 1:  stained, blemished"


**THESEUS**

I must confess that I have heard so much,
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
But, being overfull of self affairs,
My mind did [lose][43] it. But Demetrius, come;
And come, Egeus. You shall go with me.
I have some private [schooling][44] for you both.
For you, fair Hermia, look you [arm][45] yourself
To fit your fancies to your father's will;
Or else the law of Athens yields you up –
Which by no means we may [extenuate][46] –
To death or to a vow of single life.
Come, my Hippolyta. What cheer, my love?
Demetrius and Egeus, [go][47] along;
I must employ you in some business
Against our nuptial, and confer with you
Of something [nearly][49] that [concern][48]s yourselves.

[43]: {{page.q}}=19342 "lose (v.) 3:  lose sight of, forget"
[44]: {{page.q}}=16383 "schooling (n.):  admonition, reproof, counsel"
[45]: {{page.q}}=47 "arm (v.) 1:  prepare, get ready"
[46]: {{page.q}}=9906 "extenuate (v.):  mitigate, lessen, tone down"
[47]: {{page.q}}=17742 "go along:  come along, come with me"
[48]: {{page.q}}=2821 "concern (v.) 1:  be important to, be the concern of"
[49]: {{page.q}}=11385 "nearly (adv.):  closely, particularly, especially"


**EGEUS**

With duty and desire we follow you.
_Exeunt all but Lysander and Hermia_



**LYSANDER**

How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale?
How chance the roses there do fade so fast?



**HERMIA**

[Belike][50] for [want][51] of rain, which I could well
[Beteem][52] them from the tempest of my eyes.

[50]: {{page.q}}=1442 "belike (adv.):  probably, presumably, perhaps, so it seems"
[51]: {{page.q}}=7663 "want (n.) 1:  lack, shortage, dearth"
[52]: {{page.q}}=1454 "beteem, beteene (v.):  allow, permit, let, grant"


**LYSANDER**

Ay me! For [aught][53] that I could ever read,
Could ever hear by tale or history,
The course of true love never did run smooth;
But either it was different in [blood][54] –

[53]: {{page.q}}=84 "aught (n.):  anything, [with negative word] nothing"
[54]: {{page.q}}=1913 "blood (n.) 7:  nobility, breeding, gentility, good parentage"


**HERMIA**

O cross! – too high to be enthralled to low.



**LYSANDER**

Or else [misgraffed][55] in respect of years –

[55]: {{page.q}}=10744 "misgraffed (adj.):  badly grafted, ill-matched, unsuited"


**HERMIA**

O spite! – too old to be engaged to young.



**LYSANDER**

Or else it [stood upon][56] the choice of friends –

[56]: {{page.q}}=14696 "stand upon (v.) 4:  depend on, rely upon, hinge on"


**HERMIA**

O hell! – to choose love by another's eyes.



**LYSANDER**

Or if there were a [sympathy][57] in choice,
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
Making it [momentany][58] as a sound,
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
Brief as the lightning in the [collied][59] night,
That in a [[spleen][61]][60] [unfold][62]s both heaven and earth,
And – ere a man hath power to say ‘ Behold!’ –
The jaws of darkness do devour it up.
So [quick][63] bright things come to confusion.

[57]: {{page.q}}=14697 "sympathy (n.) 1:  accord, agreement, harmony"
[58]: {{page.q}}=10745 "momentany (adj.):  momentary, transitory, fleeting"
[59]: {{page.q}}=1144 "collied (adj.) 2:  blackened, darkened, murky"
[60]: {{page.q}}=14042 "spleen (n.) 5:  impulse, caprice, whim"
[61]: {{page.q}}=14266 "spleen (n.) 1:  temper, spirit, passion [part of the body seen as the source of both gloomy and mirthful emotions]"
[62]: {{page.q}}=6886 "unfold (v.) 1:  display, reveal, show"
[63]: {{page.q}}=13792 "quick (adj.) 1:  living, vital, full of life"


**HERMIA**

If then true lovers have been ever [cross][64]ed
It stands as an edict in destiny.
Then let us teach our trial patience,
Because it is a customary cross,
As due to love as thoughts, and dreams, and sighs,
Wishes, and tears – poor [fancy][65]'s followers.

[64]: {{page.q}}=2829 "cross (v.) 1:  prevent, thwart, forestall"
[65]: {{page.q}}=20677 "fancy (n.) 1:  love, amorousness, infatuation"


**LYSANDER**

A good [persuasion][66]. Therefore hear me, Hermia:
I have a widow aunt, a dowager,
Of great revenue; and she hath no child.
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues;
And she respects me as her only son.
There, [gentle][67] Hermia, may I marry thee;
And to that place the sharp Athenian law
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me, then
Steal forth thy father's house tomorrow night,
And in the wood, a league without the town –
Where I did meet thee once with Helena
To do observance to a [morn][68] of May –
There will I stay for thee.

[66]: {{page.q}}=12765 "persuasion (n.) 1:  conviction, principle, opinion"
[67]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6:  soft, tender, kind"
[68]: {{page.q}}=10474 "morn (n.):  morning, dawn"


**HERMIA**

&nbsp;                         My good Lysander,
I swear to thee by Cupid's strongest bow,
By his best arrow with the golden head,
By the [simplicity][69] of Venus' doves,
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen
When the [false][70] Trojan under sail was seen,
By all the vows that ever men have broke –
In number more than ever women spoke, –
In that same place thou hast appointed me
Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.

[69]: {{page.q}}=14683 "simplicity (n.) 2:  innocence, harmlessness, guilelessness"
[70]: {{page.q}}=19969 "false (adj.) 2:  disloyal, faithless, inconstant, unfaithful"


**LYSANDER**

Keep promise, love. Look – here comes Helena.
_Enter Helena_



**HERMIA**

God speed, fair Helena! Whither away?



**HELENA**

Call you me fair? that ‘ fair ’ again unsay.
Demetrius loves your [fair][71]. O happy [fair][71]!
Your eyes are [lodestar][73]s, and your tongue's sweet [air][72]
More [tuneable][74] than lark to shepherd's ear
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
Sickness is catching. O, were [favour][75] so,
Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go.
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,
My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody.
Were the world mine, Demetrius being [bate][76]d,
The rest I'd give to be to you [translate][77]d.
O, teach me how you look, and with what art
You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart.

[71]: {{page.q}}=19976 "fair (n.) 1:  fair face, beauty"
[72]: {{page.q}}=99 "air (n.) 1:  melody, tune, strain"
[73]: {{page.q}}=19336 "lodestar (n.):  guiding star, beacon"
[74]: {{page.q}}=5974 "tuneable (adj.):  tuneful, musical, melodious"
[75]: {{page.q}}=20678 "favour (n.) 1:  [facial] appearance, countenance, features, looks"
[76]: {{page.q}}=1705 "bate (v.) 3:  except, omit, leave out of consideration"
[77]: {{page.q}}=5485 "translate (v.) 1:  transform, change, alter"


**HERMIA**

I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.



**HELENA**

O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!



**HERMIA**

I give him curses, yet he gives me love.



**HELENA**

O that my prayers could such affection move!



**HERMIA**

The more I hate, the more he follows me.



**HELENA**

The more I love, the more he hateth me.



**HERMIA**

His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.



**HELENA**

None but your beauty. Would that fault were mine!



**HERMIA**

Take comfort. He no more shall see my face.
Lysander and myself will fly this place.
Before the time I did Lysander see
Seemed Athens as a paradise to me.
O then, what graces in my love do dwell
That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell?



**LYSANDER**

Helen, to you our minds we will unfold.
Tomorrow night, when Phoebe doth behold
Her silver [visage][79] in the watery [glass][78],
Decking with liquid pearl the [bladed][80] grass –
A time that lovers' flights doth [still][81] conceal –
Through Athens gates have we devised to steal.

[78]: {{page.q}}=17507 "glass (n.) 1:  mirror, looking-glass"
[79]: {{page.q}}=7226 "visage (n.) 1:  face, countenance"
[80]: {{page.q}}=2045 "bladed (adj.):  many-bladed, abounding in shoots"
[81]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"


**HERMIA**

And in the wood, where often you and I
Upon [faint][82] primrose beds were [wont][83] to lie,
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
There my Lysander and myself shall meet,
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes
To seek new friends and [stranger][85] [companies][84].
Farewell, sweet playfellow. Pray thou for us;
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius.
Keep word, Lysander. We must [starve][86] our sight
From lovers' food till [morrow][87] deep midnight.

[82]: {{page.q}}=20220 "faint (adj.) 5:  pale, lightly coloured"
[83]: {{page.q}}=7592 "wont (v.):  be accustomed, used [to], be in the habit of"
[84]: {{page.q}}=3642 "company (n.) 3:  companion, associate, comrade"
[85]: {{page.q}}=5899 "stranger (n.):  foreigner, alien, outsider"
[86]: {{page.q}}=16112 "starve (v.) 3:  withhold [from], diet, be sparing with"
[87]: {{page.q}}=10890 "morrow (n.):  morning"


**LYSANDER**

I will, my Hermia.
_Exit Hermia_
                         Helena, adieu!
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you.
_Exit Lysander_



**HELENA**

How happy some o'er other some can be!
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so;
He will not know what all but he do know.
And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,
So I, admiring of his qualities.
Things [base][88] and vile, holding no [quantity][89],
Love can [transpose][90] to form and dignity.
Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind,
And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind.
Nor hath Love's mind of any judgement taste;
Wings and no eyes [figure][91] [unheedy][92] haste.
And therefore is love said to be a child
Because in choice he is so [oft][93] beguiled.
As [waggish][95] boys in game themselves [forswear][94],
So the boy love is perjured everywhere;
For ere Demetrius looked on Hermia's [eyne][96]
He hailed down oaths that he was only mine,
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
So he [dissolve][97]d, and showers of oaths did melt.
I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight.
Then to the wood will he tomorrow night
Pursue her; and for this [intelligence][98]
If I have thanks it is a dear expense.
But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
To have his sight thither, and back again.
_Exit_

[88]: {{page.q}}=1475 "base (adj.) 3:  poor, wretched, of low quality"
[89]: {{page.q}}=13730 "quantity (n.) 2:  equal amount, same proportion"
[90]: {{page.q}}=6056 "transpose (v.):  change, alter, transform"
[91]: {{page.q}}=20216 "figure (v.) 1:  symbolize, represent, portray"
[92]: {{page.q}}=6820 "unheedy (adj.):  unheedful, headstrong, reckless"
[93]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.):  often"
[94]: {{page.q}}=19872 "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 1:  swear falsely, perjure [oneself], break one's word"
[95]: {{page.q}}=7798 "waggish (adj.):  playful, mischievous, impish"
[96]: {{page.q}}=9686 "eyne (n.):  [archaism] eyes"
[97]: {{page.q}}=9573 "dissolve (v.) 3:  melt, liquefy"
[98]: {{page.q}}=5037 "intelligence (n.) 1:  information, news, communication"
