---
title: A Midsummer Night's Dream
tagline: Act I - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 14:50:16 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/A_Midsummer_Night_Dream_act1_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Quince the carpenter, and Snug the joiner, and_

_Bottom the weaver, and Flute the bellows-mender,_

_and Snout the tinker, and Starveling the tailor_

**QUINCE**

Is all our company here?



**BOTTOM**

You were best to call them generally, man by
man, according to the [scrip][1].

[1]: {{page.q}}=14684 "scrip (n.) 2:  script, text"


**QUINCE**

Here is the scroll of every man's name which is
thought fit through all Athens to play in our [interlude][2]
before the Duke and the Duchess on his wedding day at
night.

[2]: {{page.q}}=5048 "interlude, enterlude (n.):  short play, theatrical performance [staged to fill an interval]"


**BOTTOM**

First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats
on; then read the names of the actors; and so grow to a
point.



**QUINCE**

_The most lamentable comedy_
_and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisbe._



**BOTTOM**

A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a
merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your actors
by the scroll. Masters, spread yourselves.



**QUINCE**

Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver?



**BOTTOM**

Ready! – Name what part I am for, and
proceed.



**QUINCE**

You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.



**BOTTOM**

What is Pyramus? – a lover or a tyrant?



**QUINCE**

A lover that kills himself, most gallant, for love.



**BOTTOM**

That will ask some tears in the true performing
of it. If I [do][3] it, let the audience look to their eyes! I will
move storms. I will [condole][4], in some measure. To the
rest. – Yet my chief [humour][5] is for a tyrant. I could play
Ercles [rarely][6], or a part to tear a cat in, to make all split:
The raging rocks
And [shivering][7] shocks
Shall break the locks
Of prison gates,
And Phibbus' [car][8]
Shall shine from far
And make and mar
The foolish Fates.
This was lofty! – Now name the rest of the players. –
This is Ercles' [vein][9], a tyrant's [vein][9]. A lover is more
[condoling][10].

[3]: {{page.q}}=8522 "do (v.) 5:  perform, play one's part, act"
[4]: {{page.q}}=1145 "condole (v.) 1:  lament, grieve, express great sorrow"
[5]: {{page.q}}=18215 "humour (n.) 2:  fancy, whim, inclination, caprice"
[6]: {{page.q}}=16672 "rarely (adv.) 1:  splendidly, beautifully, excellently"
[7]: {{page.q}}=16428 "shivering (adj.):  shattering, splintering"
[8]: {{page.q}}=3953 "car (n.):  carriage, cart, chariot [often of the sun god]"
[9]: {{page.q}}=7526 "vein (n.) 2:  style, manner"
[10]: {{page.q}}=1146 "condoling (adj.):  moving, affecting, poignant"


**QUINCE**

Francis Flute, the bellows-mender?



**FLUTE**

Here, Peter Quince.



**QUINCE**

Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.



**FLUTE**

What is Thisbe? – a wandering knight?



**QUINCE**

It is the lady that Pyramus must love.



**FLUTE**

Nay, faith, let not me play a woman – I have a
beard coming.



**QUINCE**

That's all one: you shall play it in a mask, and
you may speak as [small][11] as you will.

[11]: {{page.q}}=14502 "small (adj.) 3:  high-pitched, fluting, thin"


**BOTTOM**

An I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too.
I'll speak in a [monstrous][12] little voice: ‘ Thisne, Thisne!’
‘ Ah, Pyramus, my lover dear; thy Thisbe dear, and lady
dear.’

[12]: {{page.q}}=10752 "monstrous (adv.):  exceedingly, wonderfully, extraordinarily"


**QUINCE**

No, no; you must play Pyramus; and Flute, you
Thisbe.



**BOTTOM**

Well, proceed.



**QUINCE**

Robin Starveling, the tailor?



**STARVELING**

Here, Peter Quince.



**QUINCE**

Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe's
mother. Tom Snout, the tinker?



**SNOUT**

Here, Peter Quince.



**QUINCE**

You, Pyramus' father; myself, Thisbe's father;
Snug, the joiner, you the lion's part; and I hope here is
a play fitted.



**SNUG**

Have you the lion's part written? Pray you, if it be,
give it me; for I am slow of [study][13].

[13]: {{page.q}}=14156 "study (n.) 5:  preparation, learning, memorizing [of a part]"


**QUINCE**

You may [do][14] it [extempore][15]; for it is nothing but
roaring.

[14]: {{page.q}}=8522 "do (v.) 5:  perform, play one's part, act"
[15]: {{page.q}}=9994 "extempore (adj./adv.) 2:  spontaneously, involuntarily, without thinking"


**BOTTOM**

Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will
do any man's heart good to hear me. I will roar that I
will make the Duke say ‘ Let him roar again; let him
roar again!’



**QUINCE**

An you should do it too terribly you would [fright][16]
the Duchess and the ladies that they would shriek; and
that were enough to hang us all.

[16]: {{page.q}}=19973 "fright (v.), past form frighted:  frighten, scare, terrify"


**ALL Mechanicals**

That would hang us, every mother's son.



**BOTTOM**

I grant you, friends, if that you should fright the
ladies out of their wits they would have no more discretion
but to hang us. But I will [aggravate][17] my voice so
that I will roar you as gently as any [sucking][18] dove. I will
roar you an 'twere any nightingale.

[17]: {{page.q}}=321 "aggravate (v.) 3:  intensify; malapropism for ‘moderate’"
[18]: {{page.q}}=14685 "sucking (adj.):  unweaned, suckling"


**QUINCE**

You can play no part but Pyramus; for Pyramus
is a sweet-faced man; a [proper][19] man as one shall see in a
summer's day; a most lovely, gentlemanlike man. Therefore
you must needs play Pyramus.

[19]: {{page.q}}=12275 "proper (adj.) 1:  good-looking, handsome, comely"


**BOTTOM**

Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I
best to play it in?



**QUINCE**

Why, what you will.



**BOTTOM**

I will [discharge][20] it in either your straw-colour
beard, your [orange-tawny][21] beard, your [purple-in-grain][22]
beard, or your [French-crown-colour][23] beard, your perfect
yellow.

[20]: {{page.q}}=8712 "discharge (v.) 2:  play, perform, execute"
[21]: {{page.q}}=11774 "orange-tawny (adj.):  dull yellowish brown"
[22]: {{page.q}}=12766 "purple-in-grain (adj.):  dyed bright red"
[23]: {{page.q}}=20217 "French-crown-colour (adj.):  light yellow coloured [as the French crown coin]"


**QUINCE**

Some of your French [crown][24]s have no hair at all;
and then you will play bare-faced! But, masters, here
are your parts, and I am to entreat you, request you, and
desire you to [con][25] them by tomorrow night, and meet me
in the palace wood a mile without the town by moonlight.
There will we rehearse; for if we meet in the city
we shall be dogged with company, and our [device][26]s
known. In the meantime I will [draw][28] a [bill][27] of [properties][29]
such as our play [want][30]s. I pray you, fail me not.

[24]: {{page.q}}=1147 "crown (n.) 2:  head"
[25]: {{page.q}}=2691 "con (v.) 1:  learn by heart, commit to memory"
[26]: {{page.q}}=8401 "device (n.) 2:  plan, scheme, intention"
[27]: {{page.q}}=1127 "bill (n.) 4:  inventory, list, catalogue"
[28]: {{page.q}}=8648 "draw (v.) 3:  draw up, draft, frame"
[29]: {{page.q}}=12767 "property (n.) 4:  (plural) stage requisites, accessories, props"
[30]: {{page.q}}=7992 "want (v.) 4:  require, demand, need"


**BOTTOM**

We will meet, and there we may rehearse most
[obscenely][31] and courageously. Take pains; be perfect.
Adieu!

[31]: {{page.q}}=11775 "obscenely (adv.):  malapropism possibly for ‘seemly’"


**QUINCE**

At the Duke's oak we meet.



**BOTTOM**

Enough; [hold][32], or cut bowstrings.
Exeunt Bottom and his fellows

[32]: {{page.q}}=18635 "hold (v.) 1:  keep, maintain, observe"
