---
title: A Midsummer Night's Dream
tagline: Act II - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 15:56:18 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/A_Midsummer_Night_Dream_act2_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Titania, Queen of Fairies, with her train_

**TITANIA**

Come, now a roundel and a fairy song,
Then for the third part of a minute hence:
Some to kill [canker][1]s in the muskrose buds,
Some war with [reremice][3] for their [leathern][2] wings
To make my small elves coats, and some keep back
The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders
[At][4] our [quaint][5] spirits. Sing me now asleep;
Then to your [office][6]s, and let me rest.
_Fairies sing_

[1]: {{page.q}}=3924 "canker (n./adj.) 1:  grub that destroys plant buds and leaves, cankerworm, parasite"
[2]: {{page.q}}=19094 "leathern (adj.) 1:  leather-like"
[3]: {{page.q}}=16887 "reremouse (n.):  bat"
[4]: {{page.q}}=21100 "a (prep.) 6:  variant form of ‘to’"
[5]: {{page.q}}=13752 "quaint (adj.) 4:  pretty, attractive, lovely"
[6]: {{page.q}}=11936 "office (n.) 1:  task, service, duty, responsibility"


**FIRST FAIRY**

You spotted snakes with double tongue,
Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;
Newts and blindworms, do no wrong,
Come not near our Fairy Queen.



**CHORUS**

Philomel with melody
Sing in our sweet lullaby,
Lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby.
Never harm
Nor spell nor charm
Come our lovely lady nigh.
So good night, with lullaby.



**FIRST FAIRY**

Weaving spiders, come not here;
Hence, you longlegged [spinner][7]s, hence!
Beetles black, approach not near,
Worm nor snail, do no [offence][8].

[7]: {{page.q}}=15974 "spinner (n.):  spider, cranefly, daddy-longlegs"
[8]: {{page.q}}=11688 "offence (n.) 1:  damage, injury, harm"


**CHORUS**

Philomel with melody
Sing in our sweet lullaby,
Lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby.
Never harm
Nor spell nor charm
Come our lovely lady nigh.
So good night, with lullaby.
_Titania sleeps_



**SECOND FAIRY**

Hence, away! Now all is well.
One [aloof][9] stand sentinel!
_Exeunt Fairies_
_Enter Oberon_
_He squeezes the flower on Titania's eyes_

[9]: {{page.q}}=131 "aloof (adv.):  a short distance away, to one side"


**OBERON**

What thou seest when thou dost wake,
Do it for thy true love take;
Love and languish for his sake.
Be it [ounce][10] or cat or bear,
[Pard][11], or boar with bristled hair
In thy eye that shall appear
When thou wakest, it is thy dear.
Wake when some vile thing is near!
_Exit_
_Enter Lysander and Hermia_

[10]: {{page.q}}=11756 "ounce (n.):  lynx"
[11]: {{page.q}}=12148 "pard (n.):  panther, leopard"


**LYSANDER**

Fair love, you faint with wandering in the wood;
And – to speak [truth][12] – I have forgot our way.
We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
And tarry for the comfort of the day.

[12]: {{page.q}}=5555 "troth (n.) 1:  truth, good faith"


**HERMIA**

Be it so, Lysander; find you out a bed,
For I upon this bank will rest my head.



**LYSANDER**

One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.



**HERMIA**

Nay, good Lysander, for my sake, my dear,
Lie further off yet; do not lie so near.



**LYSANDER**

O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
Love takes the meaning in love's [conference][13] –
I mean that my heart unto yours is knit,
So that but one heart we can make of it.
Two bosoms interchained with an oath –
So then two bosoms and a single troth.
Then by your side no bed-room me deny,
For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.

[13]: {{page.q}}=2704 "conference (n.) 1:  conversation, talk, discourse"


**HERMIA**

Lysander riddles very [prettily][14].
Now much [beshrew][15] my manners and my pride
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied.
But, [gentle][16] friend, for love and courtesy
Lie further off, in human modesty:
Such separation as may well be said
[Become][17]s a virtuous bachelor and a maid,
So far be distant, and good night, sweet friend;
Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end.

[14]: {{page.q}}=12365 "prettily (adv.):  cleverly, ingeniously; or: charmingly"
[15]: {{page.q}}=1534 "beshrew, 'shrew (v.) 1:  curse, devil take, evil befall"
[16]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6:  soft, tender, kind"
[17]: {{page.q}}=1432 "become (v.) 1:  be fitting, befit, be appropriate to"


**LYSANDER**

Amen, amen, to that fair prayer say I,
And then end life when I end loyalty.
Here is my bed: sleep give thee all his rest.



**HERMIA**

With half that wish the wisher's eyes be pressed.
_They sleep_
_Enter Puck_



**PUCK**

Through the forest have I gone,
But Athenian found I none
On whose eyes I might [approve][18]
This flower's force in stirring love.
Night and silence. – Who is here?
[Weed][19]s of Athens he doth wear.
This is he my master said
Despised the Athenian maid;
And here the maiden, sleeping sound
On the dank and dirty ground.
Pretty soul, she durst not lie
Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.
Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
All the p[owe][20]r this charm doth [owe][20].
_He squeezes the flower on Lysander's eyes_
When thou wakest let love forbid
Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
So awake when I am gone;
For I must now to Oberon.
_Exit_
_Enter Demetrius and Helena, running_

[18]: {{page.q}}=40 "approve (v.) 1:  prove, confirm, corroborate, substantiate"
[19]: {{page.q}}=7564 "weed (n.) 1:  (plural) garments, dress, clothes"
[20]: {{page.q}}=11935 "owe (v.) 1:  own, possess, have"


**HELENA**

Stay though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius!



**DEMETRIUS**

I charge thee hence; and do not haunt me thus.



**HELENA**

O, wilt thou [darkling][21] leave me? Do not so!

[21]: {{page.q}}=8847 "darkling (adv.):  in the dark, in darkness"


**DEMETRIUS**

Stay, on thy peril. I alone will go.
_Exit_



**HELENA**

O, I am out of breath in this [fond][23] [chase][22].
The more my prayer, the lesser is my [grace][24].
Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies,
For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.
How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears –
If so, my eyes are oftener washed than hers.
No, no – I am as ugly as a bear;
For beasts that meet me run away for fear.
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
Do as a monster fly my presence thus.
What wicked and [dissembling][25] [glass][26] of mine
Made me [compare][27] with Hermia's [sphery][29] [eyne][28]?
But who is here? – Lysander on the ground?
Dead? – or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.
Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake!

[22]: {{page.q}}=4294 "chase (n.) 1:  pursuit, sequence, hunt"
[23]: {{page.q}}=19852 "fond (adj.) 1:  foolish, stupid, mad"
[24]: {{page.q}}=17602 "grace (n.) 7:  success, favourable outcome, fortune"
[25]: {{page.q}}=8491 "dissembling (adj.):  deceitful, hypocritical, false"
[26]: {{page.q}}=17507 "glass (n.) 1:  mirror, looking-glass"
[27]: {{page.q}}=2680 "compare (v.):  vie, rival, compete"
[28]: {{page.q}}=9686 "eyne (n.):  [archaism] eyes"
[29]: {{page.q}}=14603 "sphery (adj.):  star-like, heavenly, celestial"


**LYSANDER**

_wakes_
And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake!
Transparent Helena, nature shows [art][30]
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
Is that vile name to perish on my sword!

[30]: {{page.q}}=180 "art (n.) 6:  magic, enchantment, trickery"


**HELENA**

Do not say so, Lysander; say not so.
What though he love your Hermia, lord, what though?
Yet Hermia still loves you. Then be [content][31].

[31]: {{page.q}}=3038 "content (adj.) 3:  satisfied, calm, easy in mind"


**LYSANDER**

Content with Hermia? No, I do repent
The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
Not Hermia but Helena I love.
Who will not change a raven for a dove?
The [will][32] of man is by his reason swayed,
And reason says you are the worthier maid.
Things growing are not ripe until their season;
So I, being young, till now [ripe][33] not to reason.
And [touch][36]ing now the [point][34] of human [skill][35],
Reason becomes the marshal to my will
And leads me to your eyes, where I [o'erlook][37]
Love's stories written in love's richest book.

[32]: {{page.q}}=7725 "will (n.) 1:  desire, wish, liking, inclination"
[33]: {{page.q}}=16905 "ripe (v.):  ripen, mature"
[34]: {{page.q}}=12704 "point (n.) 3:  summit, apex, highest point"
[35]: {{page.q}}=14633 "skill (n.) 2:  discernment, discrimination, capacity to perceive"
[36]: {{page.q}}=5473 "touch (v.) 4:  achieve, accomplish, attain"
[37]: {{page.q}}=11632 "overlook (v.) 1:  look over, peruse, read through"


**HELENA**

Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
Is't not enough, is't not enough young man
That I did never – no, nor never can –
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye,
But you must flout my insufficiency?
Good troth, you do me wrong – good sooth, you do –
In such disdainful manner me to woo.
But [fare][38] you well. [Perforce][39] I must confess
I thought you lord of more [true][41] [gentleness][40].
O, that a lady of one man refused
Should of another therefore be abused!
_Exit_

[38]: {{page.q}}=20910 "fare ... well: "
[39]: {{page.q}}=12426 "perforce (adv.) 2:  of necessity, with no choice in the matter"
[40]: {{page.q}}=17720 "gentleness (n.) 1:  nobility, good breeding, courtesy"
[41]: {{page.q}}=5411 "true (adj.) 3:  honourable, virtuous, sincere"


**LYSANDER**

She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there,
And never mayst thou come Lysander near.
For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,
Or as the heresies that men do leave
Are hated most of those they did deceive,
So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,
Of all be hated, but the most of me!
And, all my [power][43]s, [address][42] your love and might
To honour Helen and to be her knight.
_Exit_

[42]: {{page.q}}=294 "address (v.) 3:  direct, apply, turn"
[43]: {{page.q}}=13080 "power (n.) 8:  faculty, function, ability"


**HERMIA**

_wakes_
Help me, Lysander, help me! Do thy best
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast!
Ay me, for pity! – What a dream was here!
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear!
[Methought][44] a serpent ate my heart away,
And you sat smiling at his cruel [prey][45].
Lysander – what, removed? Lysander, lord!
What, out of hearing? Gone? No sound, no word?
Alack, where are you? Speak an if you hear.
Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.
No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.
Either death or you I'll find immediately.
_Exit_

[44]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[45]: {{page.q}}=12778 "prey (n.) 1:  preying, violence, devouring"
