---
title: A Midsummer Night's Dream
tagline: Act II - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 14:56:23 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/A_Midsummer_Night_Dream_act2_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter a Fairy at one door, and Puck_

_Robin Goodfellow_

_at another_

**PUCK**

How now, spirit; whither wander you?



**FAIRY**

Over hill, over dale,
Thorough bush, thorough brier,
Over [park][2], over [pale][1],
Thorough flood, thorough fire –
I do wander everywhere
Swifter than the moon's [sphere][3],
And I serve the Fairy Queen,
To [dew][4] her [orb][5]s upon the green.
The cowslips tall her [pensioner][6]s be;
In their gold coats spots you see –
Those be rubies, fairy [favour][7]s;
In those freckles live their savours.
I must go seek some dewdrops here,
And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear.
Farewell, thou [lob][8] of spirits; I'll be gone.
Our Queen and all our elves come here [anon][9].

[1]: {{page.q}}=12768 "pale (n.) 2:  fenced land, park, enclosure"
[2]: {{page.q}}=13193 "park (n.):  hunting ground"
[3]: {{page.q}}=15747 "sphere (n.) 1:  celestial globe in which a heavenly body was thought to move, orbit"
[4]: {{page.q}}=8960 "dew (v.):  bedew, moisten, water"
[5]: {{page.q}}=11776 "orb (n.) 5:  fairy ring, circle"
[6]: {{page.q}}=12769 "pensioner (n.):  gentleman of the royal bodyguard"
[7]: {{page.q}}=20221 "favour (n.) 5:  mark of favour, gift, token [often a love-token]"
[8]: {{page.q}}=19337 "lob (n.):  clown, country lout, yokel"
[9]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1:  soon, shortly, presently"


**PUCK**

The King doth keep his revels here tonight.
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight,
For Oberon is [passing][11] [fell][10] and wrath
Because that she as her attendant hath
A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king.
She never had so sweet a [changeling][12],
And jealous Oberon would have the child
Knight of his train, to [trace][13] the forests wild.
But she [perforce][14] [withhold][15]s the loved boy,
Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.
And now they never meet – in grove or green,
By fountain clear or spangled starlight [sheen][16] –
But they do [square][17], that all their elves for fear
Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.

[10]: {{page.q}}=19813 "fell (adj.) 1:  cruel, fierce, savage"
[11]: {{page.q}}=12159 "passing (adv.):  very, exceedingly, extremely"
[12]: {{page.q}}=4389 "changeling (n./adj.) 1:  child taken by fairies, stolen child"
[13]: {{page.q}}=5975 "trace (v.) 3:  range over, pass through, traverse"
[14]: {{page.q}}=12178 "perforce (adv.) 1:  forcibly, by force, violently"
[15]: {{page.q}}=8248 "withhold (v.) 2:  detain, keep in possession"
[16]: {{page.q}}=13978 "sheen (n.):  brightness, shining, radiance"
[17]: {{page.q}}=14686 "square (v.) 1:  quarrel, fall out, disagree"


**FAIRY**

Either I mistake your shape and [making][18] quite,
Or else you are that [shrewd][19] and knavish sprite
Called Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he
That [fright][20]s the maidens of the [villagery][21],
Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the [quern][22],
And [bootless][23] make the breathless housewife churn,
And sometime make the drink to bear no [barm][24],
Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?
Those that ‘ Hobgoblin’ call you, and ‘ Sweet Puck,’
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
Are not you he?

[18]: {{page.q}}=10692 "making (n.):  physical appearance, bodily form, build"
[19]: {{page.q}}=14313 "shrewd (adj.) 5:  wily, cunning, mischievous"
[20]: {{page.q}}=19973 "fright (v.), past form frighted:  frighten, scare, terrify"
[21]: {{page.q}}=7314 "villagery (n.):  villages"
[22]: {{page.q}}=13790 "quern (n.):  hand-mill for grinding corn"
[23]: {{page.q}}=2040 "bootless (adv.):  fruitlessly, uselessly, unsuccessfully, in vain"
[24]: {{page.q}}=1592 "barm (n.):  froth on the top of fermenting ale"


**PUCK**

                         Thou speakest aright:
I am that merry wanderer of the night.
I jest to Oberon, and make him smile
When I a fat and bean-fed horse [beguile][25],
Neighing in likeness of a [filly][26] foal;
And sometime lurk I in a [gossip][27]'s bowl
In very likeness of a roasted [crab][28];
And when she drinks, against her lips I [bob][29],
And on her withered [dewlap][30] pour the ale.
The wisest [aunt][31] telling the [sad][32]dest tale
Sometime for threefoot stool mistaketh me;
Then slip I from her bum. Down topples she,
And ‘ Tailor ’ cries, and falls into a cough;
And then the whole [choir][33] hold their hips and laugh,
And [waxen][35] in their mirth, and [neeze][34], and swear
A merrier hour was never [waste][36]d there.
But room, Fairy: here comes Oberon.

[25]: {{page.q}}=1438 "beguile (v.) 1:  cheat, deceive, trick"
[26]: {{page.q}}=20222 "filly (adj.):  female"
[27]: {{page.q}}=17743 "gossip (n.) 4:  old woman, gossiping woman"
[28]: {{page.q}}=1148 "crab (n.):  crab-apple, sour apple"
[29]: {{page.q}}=2046 "bob (v.) 2:  knock, bump, bang"
[30]: {{page.q}}=8839 "dewlap, dewlop (n.):  folds of loose skin hanging about the neck"
[31]: {{page.q}}=322 "aunt (n.) 1:  old woman, gossip"
[32]: {{page.q}}=13906 "sad (adj.) 1:  serious, grave, solemn"
[33]: {{page.q}}=4390 "choir, quire (n.) 1:  company, group, assembly"
[34]: {{page.q}}=11386 "neeze (v.):  sneeze"
[35]: {{page.q}}=7799 "waxen (v.):  increase, grow"
[36]: {{page.q}}=7555 "waste (v.) 1:  pass, spend, while away"


**FAIRY**

And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!
_Enter Oberon, the King of Fairies, at one door, with_
_his train; and Titania, the Queen, at another with hers_



**OBERON**

[Ill][37] met by moonlight, proud Titania!

[37]: {{page.q}}=4953 "ill (adv.) 1:  badly, adversely, unfavourably"


**TITANIA**

What, jealous Oberon? Fairy, skip hence.
I have [forsworn][38] his bed and company.

[38]: {{page.q}}=19977 "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 2:  abandon, renounce, reject, give up"


**OBERON**

[Tarry][39], rash [wanton][40]! Am not I thy lord?

[39]: {{page.q}}=5567 "tarry (v.) 1:  stay, remain, linger"
[40]: {{page.q}}=7759 "wanton (n.) 4:  wilful creature, obstinate individual"


**TITANIA**

Then I must be thy lady. But I know
When thou hast stolen away from Fairyland
And in the shape of Corin sat all day
Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here
Come from the farthest [step][42] of India
But that, [forsooth][41], the bouncing Amazon,
Your [buskined][43] mistress and your warrior love,
To Theseus must be wedded? – and you come
To give their bed joy and prosperity.

[41]: {{page.q}}=20059 "forsooth (adv.):  in truth, certainly, truly, indeed"
[42]: {{page.q}}=14687 "step (n.) 1:  limit, distance, reach"
[43]: {{page.q}}=2041 "buskined (adj.):  wearing high hunting boots [buskins]"


**OBERON**

How canst thou thus, for shame, Titania,
[Glance][44] at my credit with Hippolyta,
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
Didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night
From Perigenia, whom he ravished,
And make him with fair Aegles break his faith,
With Ariadne and Antiopa?

[44]: {{page.q}}=17744 "glance at (v.) 2:  pick on, snipe at, cast aspersions on"


**TITANIA**

These are the forgeries of jealousy;
And never since the middle summer's [spring][45]
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or [mead][46],
By [paved][47] fountain or by rushy brook,
Or in the [beached][48] [margent][49] of the sea
To dance our [ringlet][50]s to the whistling wind,
But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our [sport][51].
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
As in revenge have sucked up from the sea
[Contagious][52] fogs which, falling in the land,
Have every [pelting][53] river made so [proud][54]
That they have overborne their [continent][55]s.
The ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain,
The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn
Hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard.
The fold stands empty in the drowned field,
And crows are fatted with the [murrion][57] flock.
The nine men's [morris][58] is filled up with mud,
And the [quaint][61] [maze][60]s in the [wanton][62] [green][59]
For lack of tread are [undistinguishable][63].
The human mortals [want][64] their winter cheer.
No night is now with hymn or [carol][65] blessed.
Therefore the moon, the [governess][66] of floods,
Pale in her anger, [wash][67]es all the air,
That [rheumatic][68] diseases do abound;
And thorough this [distemperature][69] we see
The seasons alter; hoary-headed frosts
Far in the fresh lap of the crimson rose,
And on old [Hiems][70]' thin and icy crown
An odorous [chaplet][71] of sweet summer buds
Is as in mockery set. The spring, the summer,
The [childing][73] autumn, angry winter [change][72]
Their [wonted][76] [liveries][74], and the [mazed][75] world
By their [increase][77] now knows not which is which.
And this same progeny of evils
Comes from our [debate][78], from our dissension.
We are their parents and [original][79].

[45]: {{page.q}}=15886 "spring (n.) 1:  first moment, dawn, break"
[46]: {{page.q}}=10519 "mead (n.):  meadow"
[47]: {{page.q}}=12770 "paved (adj.):  with a paved base, pebbled"
[48]: {{page.q}}=1593 "beached (adj.):  having a beach, shingly, sandy"
[49]: {{page.q}}=10746 "margent (n.) 2:  margin, edge, border"
[50]: {{page.q}}=16931 "ringlet (n.):  fairy dance in a ring, circular dance"
[51]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[52]: {{page.q}}=1149 "contagious (adj.) 1:  pestilential, harmful, noxious"
[53]: {{page.q}}=12333 "pelting (adj.):  paltry, petty, worthless, insignificant"
[54]: {{page.q}}=12771 "proud (adj.) 6:  swollen, high, in flood"
[55]: {{page.q}}=1150 "continent (n.) 5:  bank, embankment, course"
[56]: {{page.q}}=11631 "overbear (v.) 1:  overwhelm, overcome, overpower"
[57]: {{page.q}}=10747 "murrion (adj.):  infected with plague [murrain], diseased"
[58]: {{page.q}}=10700 "morris, nine men's:  area marked out in squares for playing nine men's morris [a type of open-air game using nine ‘men’ on each side]"
[59]: {{page.q}}=17745 "green (n.) 1:  greenery, grass, vegetation"
[60]: {{page.q}}=10748 "maze (n.) 1:  arrangement of paths, network of tracks"
[61]: {{page.q}}=13781 "quaint (adj.) 3:  intricate, elaborate"
[62]: {{page.q}}=7761 "wanton (adj.) 11:  luxuriant, flourishing, lush, profuse in growth"
[63]: {{page.q}}=6821 "undistinguishable (adj.):  unrecognizable, undetectable, impossible to pick out"
[64]: {{page.q}}=7539 "want (v.) 1:  lack, need, be without"
[65]: {{page.q}}=4659 "carol (n.) 2:  song of joy"
[66]: {{page.q}}=18129 "governess (n.):  ruler, mistress"
[67]: {{page.q}}=7800 "wash (v.):  make damp, moisten, wet"
[68]: {{page.q}}=16932 "rheumatic (adj.) 1:  with symptoms of rheum [watery discharge], catarrhal, cold-like"
[69]: {{page.q}}=8840 "distemperature (n.) 2:  disordered condition, inclement state [of weather]"
[70]: {{page.q}}=18365 "Hiems (n.):  winter [personified]"
[71]: {{page.q}}=4312 "chaplet (n.):  garland, wreath"
[72]: {{page.q}}=4340 "change (v.) 1:  exchange, trade"
[73]: {{page.q}}=4391 "childing (adj.):  fertile, fruitful, teeming"
[74]: {{page.q}}=19153 "livery (n.) 1:  uniform, costume, special clothing"
[75]: {{page.q}}=10749 "mazed (adj.):  bewildered, confused, perplexed"
[76]: {{page.q}}=7593 "wonted (adj.):  accustomed, usual, customary"
[77]: {{page.q}}=5049 "increase (n.) 1:  produce, growth, yield, crop"
[78]: {{page.q}}=8841 "debate (n.):  quarrel, wrangling, strife"
[79]: {{page.q}}=11777 "original (n.):  point of origin, cause, source"


**OBERON**

Do you amend it, then! It lies in you.
Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
I do but beg a little [changeling][80] boy
To be my [henchman][81].

[80]: {{page.q}}=4389 "changeling (n./adj.) 1:  child taken by fairies, stolen child"
[81]: {{page.q}}=18399 "henchman (n.):  squire, page of honour"


**TITANIA**

                         Set your heart at rest.
The fairy land buys not the child of me.
His mother was a [votaress][82] of my order,
And in the spiced Indian air by night
Full often hath she [gossip][83]ed by my side,
And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands
[Mark][85]ing th' embarked [trader][86]s on the [flood][84],
When we have laughed to see the sails conceive
And grow big-bellied with the [wanton][87] wind;
Which she with pretty and with swimming gait
Following – her womb then rich with my young [squire][88] –
Would imitate, and sail upon the land
To fetch me trifles, and return again
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
But she, being mortal, of that boy did die,
And for her sake do I rear up her boy;
And for her sake I will not part with him.

[82]: {{page.q}}=7299 "votaress (n.):  woman under vow, votary, devotee [of an order]"
[83]: {{page.q}}=17748 "gossip (v.) 1:  be a close companion, talk together"
[84]: {{page.q}}=19844 "flood (n.) 1:  sea, deep, waves, rushing water"
[85]: {{page.q}}=10405 "mark (v.) 1:  note, pay attention [to], take notice [of]"
[86]: {{page.q}}=5713 "trader (n.):  trading ship, merchant vessel"
[87]: {{page.q}}=7940 "wanton (adj.) 5:  sexually hot, passionate, sportive"
[88]: {{page.q}}=15463 "squire (n.) 2:  lad, fellow, youngster"


**OBERON**

How long within this wood intend you stay?



**TITANIA**

[Perchance][89] till after Theseus' wedding day.
If you will patiently dance in our [round][90]
And see our moonlight revels, go with us.
If not, shun me, and I will [spare][91] your haunts.

[89]: {{page.q}}=12175 "perchance (adv.) 1:  perhaps, maybe"
[90]: {{page.q}}=16885 "round (n.) 1:  circle dance, ring"
[91]: {{page.q}}=14602 "spare (v.) 2:  avoid, shun, keep away from"


**OBERON**

Give me that boy and I will go with thee.



**TITANIA**

Not for thy fairy kingdom! Fairies, away.
We shall [chide][92] [downright][93] if I longer stay.
_Exit Titania with her train_

[92]: {{page.q}}=4378 "chide (v.), past form chid 3:  quarrel, wrangle, fight"
[93]: {{page.q}}=8846 "downright (adv.) 2:  outright, totally, utterly"


**OBERON**

Well, go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove
Till I torment thee for this [injury][94].
My [gentle][95] Puck, come hither. Thou rememberest
Since once I sat upon a promontory
And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back
Uttering such [dulcet][97] and harmonious [breath][96]
That the [rude][98] sea grew civil at her song,
And certain stars shot madly from their [sphere][99]s
To hear the [sea-maid][100]'s music?

[94]: {{page.q}}=5024 "injury (n.) 2:  insult, affront, slight"
[95]: {{page.q}}=17496 "gentle (adj.) 2:  courteous, friendly, kind"
[96]: {{page.q}}=2003 "breath (n.) 2:  voice, song, sound"
[97]: {{page.q}}=8485 "dulcet (adj.):  sweet, mild, pleasant, agreeable"
[98]: {{page.q}}=16903 "rude (adj.) 3:  [of wind or water] stormy, turbulent, harsh"
[99]: {{page.q}}=15747 "sphere (n.) 1:  celestial globe in which a heavenly body was thought to move, orbit"
[100]: {{page.q}}=15512 "sea-maid (n.):  mermaid, sea-nymph"


**PUCK**

                         I remember.



**OBERON**

That very time I saw – but thou couldst not –
Flying between the cold moon and the earth
Cupid all armed. A [certain][101] aim he took
At a fair [vestal][102] throned by the west,
And loosed his [loveshaft][103] smartly from his bow
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts;
But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft
Quenched in the chaste beams of the watery moon,
And the imperial [votaress][104] passed on
In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
Yet [mark][106]ed I where the [bolt][105] of Cupid fell:
It fell upon a little western flower,
Before, milk-white; now purple with love's wound:
And maidens call it ‘ love in idleness.’
Fetch me that flower – the herb I showed thee once.
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid
Will make or man or woman madly dote
Upon the next live creature that it sees.
Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again
Ere the [leviathan][107] can swim a league.

[101]: {{page.q}}=4158 "certain (adj.) 3:  sure, unerring, accurate"
[102]: {{page.q}}=7297 "vestal (n.):  woman vowed to chastity, virgin, priestess"
[103]: {{page.q}}=19338 "loveshaft (n.):  love-causing arrow"
[104]: {{page.q}}=7299 "votaress (n.):  woman under vow, votary, devotee [of an order]"
[105]: {{page.q}}=1836 "bolt (n.) 1:  [short and thick, crossbow] arrow"
[106]: {{page.q}}=10405 "mark (v.) 1:  note, pay attention [to], take notice [of]"
[107]: {{page.q}}=19303 "leviathan (n.):  sea-monster, whale"


**PUCK**

I'll put a girdle round about the earth
In forty minutes!
_Exit_



**OBERON**

Having once this juice
I'll watch Titania when she is asleep,
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes.
The next thing then she, waking, looks upon –
Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,
On meddling monkey or on busy ape –
She shall pursue it with the [soul][108] of love.
And ere I take this charm from off her [sight][109] –
As I can take it with another herb –
I'll make her render up her page to me.
But who comes here? I am invisible,
And I will overhear their conference.
_Enter Demetrius, Helena following him_

[108]: {{page.q}}=14698 "soul (n.) 1:  driving force, animating principle"
[109]: {{page.q}}=14470 "sight (n.) 1:  eye"


**DEMETRIUS**

I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.
Where is Lysander, and fair Hermia?
The one I'll slay; the other slayeth me.
Thou toldest me they were stolen unto this wood,
And here am I, and [wood][110] within this [wood][110]
Because I cannot meet my Hermia.
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more!

[110]: {{page.q}}=7684 "wood (adj.):  mad, wild, furious"


**HELENA**

You draw me, you hard-hearted [adamant][111]!
But yet you draw not iron: for my heart
Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,
And I shall have no power to follow you.

[111]: {{page.q}}=178 "adamant (n.):  legendary substance of great hardness and magnetism"


**DEMETRIUS**

Do I entice you? Do I speak you [fair][112]?
Or rather do I not in plainest truth
Tell you I do not nor I cannot love you?

[112]: {{page.q}}=20162 "fair (adv.) 1:  kindly, encouragingly, courteously"


**HELENA**

And even for that do I love you the more.
I am your spaniel; and, Demetrius,
The more you beat me I will fawn on you.
Use me but as your spaniel: [spurn][113] me, strike me,
Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave,
Unworthy as I am, to follow you.
What worser place can I beg in your love –
And yet a place of high respect with me –
Than to be used as you use your dog?

[113]: {{page.q}}=14317 "spurn (v.) 2:  kick, strike, stamp [on], dash"


**DEMETRIUS**

Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit;
For I am [sick][114] when I do look on thee.

[114]: {{page.q}}=16324 "sick (adj.) 5:  full of loathing, full of repugnance"


**HELENA**

And I am sick when I look not on you.



**DEMETRIUS**

You do [impeach][115] your modesty too much,
To leave the city and commit yourself
Into the hands of one that loves you not;
To trust the opportunity of night
And the [ill][116] counsel of a desert place
With the rich worth of your virginity.

[115]: {{page.q}}=5028 "impeach (v.) 2:  discredit, disparage, call into question"
[116]: {{page.q}}=4918 "ill (adj.) 1:  bad, adverse, unfavourable"


**HELENA**

Your [virtue][117] is my privilege. For that
It is not night when I do see your face,
Therefore I think I am not in the night;
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
For you in my [respect][118] are all the world.
Then how can it be said I am alone
When all the world is here to look on me?

[117]: {{page.q}}=7426 "virtue (n.) 1:  quality, accomplishment, ability"
[118]: {{page.q}}=16945 "respect (n.) 3:  regard, admiration, favour, opinion"


**DEMETRIUS**

I'll run from thee and hide me in the [brake][119]s,
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.

[119]: {{page.q}}=1872 "brake (n.) 1:  bush, thicket"


**HELENA**

The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
Run when you will. The story shall be changed:
Apollo flies, and Daphne [hold][120]s the chase;
The dove pursues the [griffin][121]; the mild [hind][122]
Makes speed to catch the tiger – [bootless][123] speed,
When cowardice pursues, and valour flies.

[120]: {{page.q}}=18635 "hold (v.) 1:  keep, maintain, observe"
[121]: {{page.q}}=17709 "griffin (n.):  fabulous beast, part lion part eagle"
[122]: {{page.q}}=18366 "hind (n.) 3:  female deer"
[123]: {{page.q}}=1852 "bootless (adj.):  useless, worthless, fruitless, unavailing"


**DEMETRIUS**

I will not [stay][124] thy questions. Let me go;
Or if thou follow me, do not believe
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.

[124]: {{page.q}}=14068 "stay (v.) 1:  wait (for), await"


**HELENA**

Ay – in the temple, in the town, the field,
You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius,
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex.
We cannot fight for love, as men may do;
We should be wooed, and were not made to woo.
_Exit Demetrius_
I'll follow thee, and make a heaven of hell,
To die upon the hand I love so well.
_Exit Helena_



**OBERON**

[Fare][125] thee well, nymph. Ere he do leave this grove
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.
_Enter Puck_
Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.

[125]: {{page.q}}=20910 "fare ... well: "


**PUCK**

Ay, there it is.



**OBERON**

I pray thee give it me.
I know a bank where the wild thyme [blow][126]s,
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
Quite overcanopied with luscious [woodbine][127],
With [sweet][128] muskroses and with eglantine.
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
Lulled in these flowers with dances and delight.
And there the snake [throw][130]s her [enamelled][129] skin,
[Weed][131] wide enough to wrap a fairy in.
And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes
And make her full of hateful [fantasies][132].
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove.
A sweet Athenian lady is in love
With a disdainful youth – anoint his eyes;
But do it when the next thing he espies
May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man
By the Athenian garments he hath on.
Effect it with some care, that he may prove
More [fond][133] on her than she upon her love.
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.

[126]: {{page.q}}=1846 "blow (v.) 1:  blossom, bloom, flower"
[127]: {{page.q}}=8041 "woodbine (n.) 1:  honeysuckle"
[128]: {{page.q}}=15000 "sweet (adj.) 1:  perfumed, scented, fragrant"
[129]: {{page.q}}=9712 "enamelled (adj.):  brightly coloured, multi-coloured, kaleidoscopic"
[130]: {{page.q}}=5714 "throw (v.) 1:  throw off, cast, discard"
[131]: {{page.q}}=7709 "weed (n.) 2:  garment, piece of clothing"
[132]: {{page.q}}=19789 "fantasy (n.) 1:  imagining, delusion, hallucination"
[133]: {{page.q}}=19981 "fond (adj.) 4:  infatuated, doting, passionate"


**PUCK**

Fear not, my lord; your servant shall do so.
_Exeunt Oberon and Puck_

