---
title: A Midsummer Night's Dream
tagline: Act III - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 16:05:23 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/A_Midsummer_Night_Dream_act3_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter the [clowns][1]: Bottom, Quince, Snout, Starveling,_

_Flute, and Snug_

**BOTTOM**

Are we all met?

[1]: {{page.q}}=2652 "clown (n.):  yokel, rustic, country bumpkin; also: low comic character [in a play]"


**QUINCE**

[Pat][4], pat; and here's a [marvellous][3] [convenient][2] place
for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be our stage, this
hawthorn [brake][5] our [tiring-house][6], and we will do it in
action as we will do it before the Duke.

[2]: {{page.q}}=2945 "convenient (adj.):  fitting, suitable, appropriate"
[3]: {{page.q}}=10411 "marvellous (adv.):  very, extremely, exceedingly"
[4]: {{page.q}}=12705 "pat (adv.) 2:  spot on, on the dot, very timely"
[5]: {{page.q}}=1872 "brake (n.) 1:  bush, thicket"
[6]: {{page.q}}=5724 "tiring-house (n.):  dressing-room, theatrical green room"


**BOTTOM**

Peter Quince!



**QUINCE**

What sayest thou, [Bully][7] Bottom?

[7]: {{page.q}}=2016 "bully (n./adj.):  [especially as a warm form of address] fine fellow, good friend"


**BOTTOM**

There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and
Thisbe that will never please. First, Pyramus must draw
a sword to kill himself, which the ladies cannot abide.
How answer you that?



**SNOUT**

By 'r lakin, a [parlous][8] fear!

[8]: {{page.q}}=12399 "parlous (adj.) 1:  perilous, dangerous, hazardous"


**STARVELING**

I believe we must leave the killing out,
when all is done.



**BOTTOM**

Not a whit. I have a device to make all well.
Write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to say
we will do no harm with our swords, and that Pyramus
is not killed indeed; and for the more better [assurance][9],
tell them that I, Pyramus, am not Pyramus, but Bottom
the weaver. This will put them out of fear.

[9]: {{page.q}}=72 "assurance (n.) 1:  security, certainty, confidence"


**QUINCE**

Well, we will have such a prologue; and it shall
be written in eight and six.



**BOTTOM**

No, make it two more: let it be written in eight
and eight.



**SNOUT**

Will not the ladies be [afeard][10] of the lion?

[10]: {{page.q}}=10 "afeard (adj.):  afraid, frightened, scared"


**STARVELING**

I fear it, I promise you.



**BOTTOM**

Masters, you ought to consider with yourself, to
bring in – God shield us – a lion among ladies is a most
dreadful thing; for there is not a more fearful wildfowl
than your lion living; and we ought look to't.



**SNOUT**

Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a
lion.



**BOTTOM**

Nay, you must name his name, and half his face
must be seen through the lion's neck, and he himself
must speak through, saying thus, or to the same [defect][11]:
‘ Ladies ’, or ‘ Fair ladies – I would wish you ’, or ‘ I would
request you ’, or ‘ I would entreat you – not to fear, not to
tremble. My life for yours: if you think I come hither
as a lion, it were [pity][12] of my life. No. I am no such
thing. I am a man, as other men are ’ – and there indeed
let him name his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug
the joiner.

[11]: {{page.q}}=8804 "defect (n.) 2:  malapropism for ‘effect’"
[12]: {{page.q}}=12706 "pity (n.):  bad thing, sad fate, calamity [for]"


**QUINCE**

Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things:
that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber – for, you
know, Pyramus and Thisbe meet by moonlight.



**SNOUT**

Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?



**BOTTOM**

A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanac –
find out moonshine, find out moonshine!



**QUINCE**

Yes, it doth shine that night.



**BOTTOM**

Why, then, may you leave a [casement][13] of the
Great Chamber window – where we play – open, and
the moon may shine in at the casement.

[13]: {{page.q}}=4160 "casement (n.) 2:  moveable section of a window, light"


**QUINCE**

Ay; or else one must come in with a bush of
thorns and a lantern, and say he comes to [disfigure][14] or to
present the person of Moonshine. Then there is another
thing. We must have a wall in the Great Chamber; for
Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story, did talk through the
chink of a wall.

[14]: {{page.q}}=8805 "disfigure (v.):  stand for, disguise, alter the appearance of"


**SNOUT**

You can never bring in a wall. What say you,
Bottom?



**BOTTOM**

Some man or other must present Wall; and let
him have some plaster, or some loam, or some roughcast
about him to signify Wall; and let him hold his fingers
thus, and through that cranny shall Pyramus and Thisbe
whisper.



**QUINCE**

If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down
every mother's son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus,
you begin. When you have spoken your speech, enter
into that [brake][15]; and so everyone according to his cue.
_Enter Puck_

[15]: {{page.q}}=1872 "brake (n.) 1:  bush, thicket"


**PUCK**

What hempen homespuns have we swaggering here
So near the [cradle][16] of the Fairy Queen?
What, a play [toward][17]! I'll be an auditor –
An actor too, perhaps, if I see cause.

[16]: {{page.q}}=1155 "cradle (n.) 1:  place of repose, resting place"
[17]: {{page.q}}=5476 "toward (adv.):  impending, forthcoming, in preparation"


**QUINCE**

Speak, Pyramus! Thisbe, stand forth!



**BOTTOM as Pyramus**

Thisbe, the flowers of odious savours sweet –



**QUINCE**

Odours – odours!



**BOTTOM as Pyramus**

...odours savours sweet.
So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisbe dear.
But hark, a voice. Stay thou but here awhile,
And by and by I will to thee appear.
_Exit_



**PUCK**

A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here.
_Exit_



**FLUTE**

Must I speak now?



**QUINCE**

Ay, marry must you; for you must understand he
goes but to see a noise that he heard, and is to come
again.



**FLUTE as Thisbe**

Most radiant Pyramus, most lilywhite of hue,
Of colour like the red rose on triumphant briar,
Most [brisky][18] [juvenal][20], and [eke][19] most lovely Jew,
As true as truest horse that yet would never tire,
I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb –

[18]: {{page.q}}=2042 "brisky (adj.):  brisk, lively, sprightly"
[19]: {{page.q}}=9720 "eke (adv.):  [archaism] also, moreover, too"
[20]: {{page.q}}=18897 "juvenal (n.):  youth, young man"


**QUINCE**

‘ Ninus' tomb ’, man! – Why, you must not speak
that yet. That you answer to Pyramus. You speak all
your part at once, cues and all. Pyramus, enter – your
cue is past. It is ‘ never tire.’



**FLUTE**

O!
_as Thisbe_
As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire.
_Enter Puck, and Bottom with an ass's head_



**BOTTOM as Pyramus**

If I were fair, fair Thisbe, I were only thine.



**QUINCE**

O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted! Pray,
masters! Fly, masters! Help!
_Exeunt Quince, Snug, Flute, Snout, and Starveling_



**PUCK**

I'll follow you, I'll lead you about a [round][21],
Thorough bog, thorough bush, thorough [brake][22], thorough briar,
[Sometime][23] a horse I'll be, [sometime][23] a hound,
A hog, a headless bear, sometime a [fire][24],
And neigh, and bark, and grunt and roar and burn
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire at every turn.
_Exit_

[21]: {{page.q}}=16885 "round (n.) 1:  circle dance, ring"
[22]: {{page.q}}=1872 "brake (n.) 1:  bush, thicket"
[23]: {{page.q}}=14078 "sometime (adv.) 2:  sometimes, now and then"
[24]: {{page.q}}=20178 "fire (n.) 3:  will o' the wisp"


**BOTTOM**

Why do they run away? This is a [knavery][25] of
them to make me [afeard][26].
_Enter Snout_

[25]: {{page.q}}=19056 "knavery (n.) 1:  roguish trick, rouguery, trickery"
[26]: {{page.q}}=10 "afeard (adj.):  afraid, frightened, scared"


**SNOUT**

O Bottom, thou art changed. What do I see on
thee?



**BOTTOM**

What do you see? You see an ass head of your
own, do you?
_Exit Snout_
_Enter Quince_



**QUINCE**

Bless thee, Bottom! Bless thee! Thou art
translated!
_Exit_



**BOTTOM**

I see their [knavery][27]! This is to make an ass of me,
to [fright][28] me, if they could; but I will not stir from this
place, do what they can. I will walk up and down here,
and I will sing, that they shall hear I am not afraid.
(sings) The [ousel][29] cock so black of hue,
With orange-tawny bill,
The [throstle][30] with his note so true,
The wren with [little][31] [quill][32].

[27]: {{page.q}}=19056 "knavery (n.) 1:  roguish trick, rouguery, trickery"
[28]: {{page.q}}=19973 "fright (v.), past form frighted:  frighten, scare, terrify"
[29]: {{page.q}}=11760 "ousel, woosel (n./adj.):  blackbird"
[30]: {{page.q}}=5725 "throstle (n.):  thrush"
[31]: {{page.q}}=19318 "little (adj.) 2:  [of voices] small, tiny"
[32]: {{page.q}}=13782 "quill (n.):  musical pipe, voice, note"


**TITANIA**

_wakes_
What angel wakes me from my flowery bed?



**BOTTOM**

_sings_
The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
The [plainsong][33] cuckoo grey,
Whose note full many a man doth [mark][34]
And dares not answer ‘ Nay ’
– for, indeed, who would [set][35] his [wit][36] to so foolish a bird?
Who would give a bird the lie, though he cry ‘ cuckoo ’
never so?

[33]: {{page.q}}=12707 "plainsong (adj.):  lacking in ornament, melodically simple"
[34]: {{page.q}}=10405 "mark (v.) 1:  note, pay attention [to], take notice [of]"
[35]: {{page.q}}=14688 "set (v.) 2:  rate, stake, gamble"
[36]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"


**TITANIA**

I pray thee, [gentle][37] mortal, sing again!
Mine ear is much enamoured of thy note.
So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape,
And thy fair [virtue][38]'s force perforce doth move me
On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee.

[37]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6:  soft, tender, kind"
[38]: {{page.q}}=7426 "virtue (n.) 1:  quality, accomplishment, ability"


**BOTTOM**

[Methinks][39], mistress, you should have little reason
for that. And yet, to say the truth, reason and love keep
little company together nowadays – the more the pity
that some honest neighbours will not make them friends.
– Nay, I can [gleek][40] upon occasion.

[39]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[40]: {{page.q}}=17721 "gleek (v.):  make a pointed joke, jest, gibe"


**TITANIA**

Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.



**BOTTOM**

Not so, neither; but if I had [wit][41] enough to get
out of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.

[41]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"


**TITANIA**

Out of this wood do not desire to go!
Thou shalt remain here, whether thou wilt or no.
I am a spirit of no common [rate][42].
The summer [still][43] doth tend upon my state,
And I do love thee. Therefore go with me.
I'll give thee fairies to [attend][44] on thee,
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,
And sing while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep;
And I will purge thy mortal [grossness][45] so
That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.
Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Moth, and Mustardseed!
_Enter the four Fairies_

[42]: {{page.q}}=17319 "rate (n.) 4:  worth, value, merit"
[43]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"
[44]: {{page.q}}=913 "attend (v.) 2:  serve, follow, wait [on/upon]"
[45]: {{page.q}}=17722 "grossness (n.) 2:  material nature, bodily form"


**PEASEBLOSSOM**

Ready!



**COBWEB**

And I!



**MOTH**

And I!



**MUSTARDSEED**

And I!



**ALL Fairies**

Where shall we go?



**TITANIA**

Be kind and courteous to this gentleman.
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
Feed him with [apricock][46]s and [dewberries][47],
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries.
The honey bags steal from the humble bees,
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs
And light them at the fiery glow-worms' eyes
To have my love to bed and to arise;
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.

[46]: {{page.q}}=103 "apricock (n.):  apricot"
[47]: {{page.q}}=8806 "dewberry (n.):  species of blackberry"


**PEASEBLOSSOM**

Hail, mortal!



**COBWEB**

Hail!



**MOTH**

Hail!



**MUSTARDSEED**

Hail!



**BOTTOM**

I cry your worships mercy, heartily. I beseech
your worship's name.



**COBWEB**

Cobweb.



**BOTTOM**

I shall [desire][48] you of more acquaintance, good
Master Cobweb – if I cut my finger I shall make bold
with you! – Your name, honest gentleman?

[48]: {{page.q}}=8613 "desire (v.) 1:  request, wish, ask [for]"


**PEASEBLOSSOM**

Peaseblossom.



**BOTTOM**

I pray you [commend][49] me to Mistress Squash,
your mother, and to Master Peascod, your father. Good
Master Peaseblossom, I shall [desire][50] you of more acquaintance,
too. – Your name, I beseech you, sir?

[49]: {{page.q}}=2672 "commend (v.) 1:  convey greetings, present kind regards"
[50]: {{page.q}}=8613 "desire (v.) 1:  request, wish, ask [for]"


**MUSTARDSEED**

Mustardseed.



**BOTTOM**

Good Master Mustardseed, I know your
patience well. That same cowardly, giantlike Oxbeef
hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. I
promise you, your kindred hath made my eyes water
ere now. I desire your more acquaintance, good Master
Mustardseed.



**TITANIA**

Come, wait upon him. Lead him to my bower.
The moon [methinks][51] looks with a watery eye;
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,
Lamenting some [enforced][52] chastity.
Tie up my lover's tongue; bring him silently.
_Exit Titania with Bottom and the Fairies_

[51]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[52]: {{page.q}}=9881 "enforced (adj.) 2:  violated, assaulted, ravished"
