---
title: A Midsummer Night's Dream
tagline: Act III - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 16:15:44 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/A_Midsummer_Night_Dream_act3_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
# [16]  [173] not found
---

_Enter Oberon, King of Fairies_

**OBERON**

I wonder if Titania be awaked;
Then what it was that next came in her eye,
Which she must dote on, in extremity.
Here comes my messenger.
_Enter Puck_
How now, mad spirit?
What [night-rule][1] now about this haunted grove?

[1]: {{page.q}}=11377 "night-rule (n.):  night-time activity, nocturnal diversion"


**PUCK**

My mistress with a monster is in love.
Near to her [close][2] and consecrated bower,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
A crew of [patch][4]es, [[rude][6]][5] [mechanical][3]s
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
Were met together to rehearse a play
Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day.
The shallowest [thickskin][9] of that [barren][7] [sort][8],
Who Pyramus presented, in their [sport][10]
Forsook his [scene][12] and entered in a [brake][11],
When I did him at this advantage take.
An ass's [nole][13] I fixed on his head.
[Anon][14] his Thisbe must be answered,
And forth my [mimic][15] comes. When they him spy –
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
Or [russet-pated][18] [chough][17]s, many in [sort][19],
Rising and cawing at the gun's report,
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky –
So at his sight away his fellows fly,
And at our stamp here o'er and o'er one falls.
He ‘ Murder!’ cries, and help from Athens calls.
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong,
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong.
For briars and thorns at their [apparel][20] snatch,
Some sleeves, some hats. From [yielder][22]s all things [catch][21].
I led them on in this distracted fear,
And left sweet Pyramus [translate][23]d there;
When in that moment – so it came to pass –
Titania waked, and straightway loved an ass.

[2]: {{page.q}}=3143 "close (adj.) 2:  private, secluded, sequestered"
[3]: {{page.q}}=10713 "mechanical (n.):  manual worker, craftsman, menial"
[4]: {{page.q}}=12537 "patch (n.):  fool, clown; rogue, knave"
[5]: {{page.q}}=16762 "rude (adj.) 6:  ignorant, unlearned, uneducated"
[6]: {{page.q}}=16902 "rude (adj.) 4:  uncivilized, uncultivated, unrefined"
[7]: {{page.q}}=1584 "barren (adj.) 2:  stupid, empty-headed, dull"
[8]: {{page.q}}=5925 "sort (n.) 2:  pack, crowd, gang"
[9]: {{page.q}}=5979 "thickskin, thick-skin (n.):  brutishly built, dullard, blockhead"
[10]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[11]: {{page.q}}=1872 "brake (n.) 1:  bush, thicket"
[12]: {{page.q}}=14634 "scene (n.) 2:  stage, performing area"
[13]: {{page.q}}=11378 "nole (n.):  noddle, head"
[14]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1:  soon, shortly, presently"
[15]: {{page.q}}=10714 "mimic (n.):  burlesque actor, performer, thespian"
[16]: {{page.q}}=4299 "chide (v.), past form chid 1:  scold, rebuke, reprove"
[17]: {{page.q}}=4313 "chough (n.) 1:  jackdaw"
[18]: {{page.q}}=16906 "russet-pated (adj.):  with reddish-brown head; or: grey-headed"
[19]: {{page.q}}=5925 "sort (n.) 2:  pack, crowd, gang"
[20]: {{page.q}}=37 "apparel (n.):  clothes, clothing, dress"
[21]: {{page.q}}=4161 "catch (v.) 1:  seize, get hold of, capture"
[22]: {{page.q}}=8301 "yielder (n.):  one who gives up, conceder"
[23]: {{page.q}}=5485 "translate (v.) 1:  transform, change, alter"


**OBERON**

This falls out better than I could devise!
But hast thou yet [latch][24]ed the Athenian's eyes
With the love juice, as I did bid thee do?

[24]: {{page.q}}=19319 "latch (v.) 3:  fasten, secure; or: moisten [leach]"


**PUCK**

I took him sleeping – that is finished too;
And the Athenian woman by his side,
That when he waked of force she must be eyed.
_Enter Demetrius and Hermia_



**OBERON**

Stand close. This is the same Athenian.



**PUCK**

This is the woman, but not this the man.



**DEMETRIUS**

O, why [rebuke][25] you him that loves you so?
Lay [breath][26] so bitter on your bitter foe.

[25]: {{page.q}}=17343 "rebuke (v.):  repress, put down, check"
[26]: {{page.q}}=1064 "breath (n.) 1:  utterance, speech, voice"


**HERMIA**

Now I but [chide][27]; but I should use thee worse,
For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep,
And kill me too.
The sun was not so true unto the day
As he to me. Would he have stolen away
From sleeping Hermia? I'll believe as soon
This [whole][28] earth may be bored, and that the moon
May through the [centre][29] creep, and so displease
Her brother's noontide with the Antipodes.
It cannot be but thou hast murdered him.
So should a murderer look; so [dead][30], so grim.

[27]: {{page.q}}=4299 "chide (v.), past form chid 1:  scold, rebuke, reprove"
[28]: {{page.q}}=7859 "whole (adj.) 2:  unbroken, sound, intact"
[29]: {{page.q}}=4121 "centre (n.) 1:  centre of the Earth, axis"
[30]: {{page.q}}=8842 "dead (adj.) 4:  deadly, death-dealing, murderous"


**DEMETRIUS**

So should the murdered look, and so should I,
Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty.
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as [clear][31],
As yonder Venus in her glimmering [sphere][32].

[31]: {{page.q}}=4708 "clear (adj.) 3:  serene, cheerful, unclouded"
[32]: {{page.q}}=15747 "sphere (n.) 1:  celestial globe in which a heavenly body was thought to move, orbit"


**HERMIA**

What's this to my Lysander? Where is he?
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?



**DEMETRIUS**

I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.



**HERMIA**

Out, dog! Out, cur! Thou drivest me past the bounds
Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him then?
Henceforth be never numbered among men.
O, once tell true – tell true, even for my sake.
Durst thou have looked upon him being awake?
And hast thou killed him sleeping? O, [brave][33] [touch][34]!
Could not a [worm][35], an adder do so much?
An adder did it; for with [double][36]r tongue
Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.

[33]: {{page.q}}=2438 "brave (adj.) 2:  noble, worthy, excellent"
[34]: {{page.q}}=5726 "touch (n.) 4:  act, action, deed"
[35]: {{page.q}}=7769 "worm (n.) 1:  serpent, snake"
[36]: {{page.q}}=8799 "double (adj.) 2:  forked, divided"


**DEMETRIUS**

You [spend][40] your [passion][39] on a [misprised][37] [mood][38].
I am not guilty of Lysander's blood.
Nor is he dead, for [aught][41] that I can tell.

[37]: {{page.q}}=10715 "misprised (adj.):  mistaken, misguided, erroneous"
[38]: {{page.q}}=10637 "mood (n.) 1:  anger, fury, frenzy, fit of temper"
[39]: {{page.q}}=12343 "passion (n.) 4:  fit of anger, feeling of rage"
[40]: {{page.q}}=14307 "spend (v.) 2:  expend, express, give vent to"
[41]: {{page.q}}=84 "aught (n.):  anything, [with negative word] nothing"


**HERMIA**

I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.



**DEMETRIUS**

An if I could, what should I get therefore?



**HERMIA**

A privilege never to see me more;
And from thy hated presence part I so.
See me no more, whether he be dead or no.
_Exit_



**DEMETRIUS**

There is no following her in this fierce vein.
Here therefore for a while I will remain.
So sorrow's heaviness doth [heavier][42] grow
For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe,
Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
If for his [tender][43] here I make some stay.
_He lies down and sleeps_

[42]: {{page.q}}=18511 "heavy (adj.) 3:  pressing, weighty, overpowering"
[43]: {{page.q}}=5441 "tender (n.) 1:  offer, offering"


**OBERON**

What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite,
And laid the love juice on some true love's sight.
Of thy [misprision][44] must [perforce][45] ensue
Some true love [turn][47]ed, and not a [false][46] turned true.

[44]: {{page.q}}=10716 "misprision (n.) 1:  mistake, error, misunderstanding, misconception"
[45]: {{page.q}}=12426 "perforce (adv.) 2:  of necessity, with no choice in the matter"
[46]: {{page.q}}=19980 "false (adj.) 3:  sham, spurious, not genuine, artificial"
[47]: {{page.q}}=6130 "turn (v.) 1:  change, transform, alter"


**PUCK**

Then fate o'errules, that, one man holding truth,
A million fail, confounding oath on oath.



**OBERON**

About the wood go swifter than the wind,
And Helena of Athens look thou find.
All [fancy-sick][49] she is and pale of [cheer][48]
With sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear.
By some [illusion][50] see thou bring her here.
I'll charm his eyes against she do appear.

[48]: {{page.q}}=4316 "cheer (n.) 4:  face, look, expression"
[49]: {{page.q}}=20179 "fancy-sick (adj.):  love-sick, infatuated, pining"
[50]: {{page.q}}=21198 "illusion (n.):  deception, delusion, deceit"


**PUCK**

I go, I go – look how I go –
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.
_Exit_



**OBERON**

Flower of this purple dye,
Hit with Cupid's archery,
Sink in [apple][51] of his eye.
_He squeezes the flower on Demetrius's eyes_
When his love he doth espy,
Let her shine as gloriously
As the Venus of the sky.
When thou wakest, if she be by,
Beg of her for remedy.
_Enter Puck_

[51]: {{page.q}}=295 "apple (n.):  pupil, centre"


**PUCK**

Captain of our fairy band,
Helena is here at hand,
And the youth mistook by me,
Pleading for a lover's [fee][52].
Shall we their [fond][53] [pageant][54] see?
Lord, what fools these mortals be!

[52]: {{page.q}}=20180 "fee (n.) 2:  payment, reward, recompense"
[53]: {{page.q}}=20679 "fond (adj.) 2:  foolish, trifling, frivolous"
[54]: {{page.q}}=12134 "pageant (n.):  show, scene, spectacle, tableau"


**OBERON**

Stand aside. The noise they make
Will cause Demetrius to awake.



**PUCK**

Then will two at once woo one –
That must needs be [sport][55] alone;
And those things do best please me
That [befall][56] [preposterously][57].
_Enter Lysander and Helena_

[55]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[56]: {{page.q}}=1435 "befall (v.), past forms befallen, befell 1:  happen, occur, take place, turn out"
[57]: {{page.q}}=12779 "preposterously (adv.):  out of the normal course of events, unnaturally, perversely"


**LYSANDER**

Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
Scorn and derision never come in tears.
[Look][58] when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
In their nativity all truth appears.
How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true?

[58]: {{page.q}}=19269 "look when (conj.):  whenever, as soon as"


**HELENA**

You do [advance][59] your cunning more and more.
When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray!
These vows are Hermia's. Will you [give][60] her o'er?
Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh.
Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
Will even weigh, and both as light as [tale][61]s.

[59]: {{page.q}}=326 "advance (v.) 2:  display, present, promote"
[60]: {{page.q}}=18034 "give over (v.) 1:  desert, leave, abandon"
[61]: {{page.q}}=5539 "tale (n.) 3:  false rumour, story, tittle-tattle"


**LYSANDER**

I had no judgement when to her I swore.



**HELENA**

Nor none in my mind now you give her o'er.



**LYSANDER**

Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.



**DEMETRIUS**

_wakes_
O Helena, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine –
To what, my love, shall I compare thine [eyne][62]?
Crystal is muddy! O, how [ripe][63] in show
Thy lips – those kissing cherries – tempting grow!
That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,
Fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
When thou holdest up thy hand. O, let me kiss
This [princess][64] of pure white, this [seal][65] of bliss!

[62]: {{page.q}}=9686 "eyne (n.):  [archaism] eyes"
[63]: {{page.q}}=16968 "ripe (adj.) 6:  red and full like ripe fruit"
[64]: {{page.q}}=12708 "princess (n.):  paragon, sovereign form, ideal"
[65]: {{page.q}}=14635 "seal (n.) 2:  pledge, promise, token, sign"


**HELENA**

O spite! O hell! I see you all are [bent][66]
To [set][67] against me for your merriment.
If you were civil and knew [courtesy][68]
You would not do me thus much [injury][69].
Can you not hate me – as I know you do –
But you must join in souls to mock me too?
If you were men – as men you are in show –
You would not use a [gentle][70] lady so,
To vow, and swear, and superpraise my [part][71]s,
When, I am sure, you hate me with your hearts.
You both are rivals, and love Hermia;
And now both rivals to mock Helena.
A [trim][72] exploit, a manly enterprise –
To [conjure][73] tears up in a poor maid's eyes
With your derision. None of noble [sort][74]
Would so offend a virgin, and [extort][75]
A poor soul's patience, all to make you [sport][76].

[66]: {{page.q}}=1026 "bent (adj.) 1:  determined, intent, resolved"
[67]: {{page.q}}=14699 "set against (v.):  be hostile to, make an attack on"
[68]: {{page.q}}=3633 "courtesy, cur'sy, curtsy (n.) 1:  courteous service, polite behaviour, good manners"
[69]: {{page.q}}=5024 "injury (n.) 2:  insult, affront, slight"
[70]: {{page.q}}=17495 "gentle (adj.) 1:  well-born, honourable, noble"
[71]: {{page.q}}=12150 "part (n.) 1:  quality, attribute, gift, accomplishment [of mind or body]"
[72]: {{page.q}}=5637 "trim (adj.) 1:  fine, excellent, smart"
[73]: {{page.q}}=1156 "conjure up (v.):  bring about [as if by magic], cause to appear"
[74]: {{page.q}}=14030 "sort (n.) 1:  class, level, social rank"
[75]: {{page.q}}=9882 "extort (v.) 1:  torture, abuse, wring"
[76]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"


**LYSANDER**

You are unkind, Demetrius. Be not so,
For you love Hermia – this you know I know.
And here: with all good will, with all my heart,
In Hermia's love I yield you up my part.
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
Whom I do love, and will do till my death.



**HELENA**

Never did mockers waste more idle breath.



**DEMETRIUS**

Lysander, keep thy Hermia. I will none.
If e'er I loved her all that love is gone.
My heart to her but as [guestwise][77] [sojourn][78]ed,
And now to Helen is it home returned,
There to remain.

[77]: {{page.q}}=17723 "guestwise (adv.):  in the manner of a guest, as a visitor"
[78]: {{page.q}}=14700 "sojourn (v.) 2:  travel, journey, go to stay"


**LYSANDER**

Helen, it is not so.



**DEMETRIUS**

Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
Lest to thy peril thou [aby][79] it dear.
Look where thy love comes: yonder is thy dear.
_Enter Hermia_

[79]: {{page.q}}=724 "aby (v.):  suffer for, pay for, atone for"


**HERMIA**

Dark night that from the eye his function takes
The ear more quick of [apprehension][80] makes.
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense
It pays the hearing double recompense.
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
Mine ear – I thank it – brought me to thy sound.
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?

[80]: {{page.q}}=1262 "apprehension (n.) 4:  perception, auditory reception"


**LYSANDER**

Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?



**HERMIA**

What love could press Lysander from my side?



**LYSANDER**

Lysander's love, that would not let him bide:
Fair Helena, who more [engild][81]s the night
Than all y[o][82]u fiery oes and eyes of light,
Why seekest thou me? Could not this make thee know
The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?

[81]: {{page.q}}=9883 "engild (v.):  gild, brighten, illuminate"
[82]: {{page.q}}=11894 "O (n.) 1:  circle, orb, sphere"


**HERMIA**

You speak not as you think. It cannot be.



**HELENA**

Lo, she is one of this confederacy.
Now I perceive they have conjoined all three
To [fashion][84] this [false][83] [sport][86] in [spite][85] of me.
Injurious Hermia, most ungrateful maid,
Have you conspired, have you with these contrived
To [bait][87] me with this foul derision?
Is all the counsel that we two have shared –
The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent
When we have chid the hasty-footed time
For parting us – O, is all forgot?
All schooldays' friendship, childhood innocence?
We, Hermia, like two [artificial][88] gods
Have with our needles created both one flower,
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
Both warbling of one song, both in one [key][89],
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds
Had been [incorporate][90]. So we grew together
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted
But yet an union in partition,
Two lovely berries moulded on one stem,
So with two seeming bodies but one heart,
Two of the [first][92], like [coat][91]s in heraldry,
Due but to one, and crowned with one [crest][93].
And will you [rent][94] our ancient love asunder,
To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
It is not friendly, 'tis not maidenly.
Our sex as well as I may [chide][95] you for it,
Though I alone do feel the injury.

[83]: {{page.q}}=20561 "false (adj.) 7:  unfair, unjust, double-crossing"
[84]: {{page.q}}=20665 "fashion (v.) 3:  arrange, contrive, manage"
[85]: {{page.q}}=14578 "spite (n.) 1:  annoyance, vexation, irritation"
[86]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[87]: {{page.q}}=1317 "bait (v.) 1:  harass, persecute, torment"
[88]: {{page.q}}=296 "artificial (adj.) 1:  showing creative artistry, artistically skilful"
[89]: {{page.q}}=19024 "key (n.) 2:  accord, rapport, mind"
[90]: {{page.q}}=4960 "incorporate (adj.):  united in one body, combined in one entity"
[91]: {{page.q}}=2939 "coat (n.) 1:  coat-of-arms"
[92]: {{page.q}}=20181 "first (n.) 2:  [heraldry] first tincture in a blazon"
[93]: {{page.q}}=3432 "crest (n.) 3:  heraldic device placed above the shield and helmet in a coat-of-arms"
[94]: {{page.q}}=16907 "rent (v.):  rend, tear, pull to pieces"
[95]: {{page.q}}=4299 "chide (v.), past form chid 1:  scold, rebuke, reprove"


**HERMIA**

I am amazed at your passionate words.
I scorn you not; it seems that you scorn me.



**HELENA**

Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
To follow me and praise my eyes and face?
And made your other love, Demetrius –
Who even but now did [spurn][96] me with his foot –
To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,
Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander
Deny your love, so rich within his soul,
And tender me [forsooth][97] affection,
But by your [set][98]ting on, by your consent?
What though I be not so in grace as you,
So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
But miserable most, to love unloved:
This you should pity rather than despise.

[96]: {{page.q}}=14317 "spurn (v.) 2:  kick, strike, stamp [on], dash"
[97]: {{page.q}}=20059 "forsooth (adv.):  in truth, certainly, truly, indeed"
[98]: {{page.q}}=14365 "set on (v.) 1:  encourage, urge, incite"


**HERMIA**

I understand not what you mean by this.



**HELENA**

Ay, do! [Persever][100], [counterfeit][99] [sad][101] looks,
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
Wink each at other, [hold][102] the sweet jest up.
This [sport][105] well [carried][103] shall be [chronicle][104]d.
If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
You would not make me such an [argument][106].
But [fare][107] ye well. 'Tis partly my own fault,
Which death or absence soon shall remedy.

[99]: {{page.q}}=2883 "counterfeit (v.) 2:  pretend, feign, make believe"
[100]: {{page.q}}=12181 "persever (v.) 1:  persevere, persist, keep at it"
[101]: {{page.q}}=13906 "sad (adj.) 1:  serious, grave, solemn"
[102]: {{page.q}}=18182 "hold up (v.) 1:  continue, keep going, carry on"
[103]: {{page.q}}=4126 "carry (v.) 5:  carry out, manage, conduct"
[104]: {{page.q}}=4393 "chronicle (v.) 2:  enter into a chronicle, record in history"
[105]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[106]: {{page.q}}=280 "argument (n.) 3:  subject, point, theme, target"
[107]: {{page.q}}=20910 "fare ... well: "


**LYSANDER**

Stay, [gentle][108] Helena, hear my excuse,
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena!

[108]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6:  soft, tender, kind"


**HELENA**

O excellent!



**HERMIA**

_to Lysander_
Sweet, do not scorn her so.



**DEMETRIUS**

If she cannot entreat, I can compel.



**LYSANDER**

Thou canst compel no more than she entreat.
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers.
Helen, I love thee. By my life, I do.
I swear by that which I will lose for thee
To prove him [false][109] that says I love thee not.

[109]: {{page.q}}=20466 "false (adj.) 4:  wrong, mistaken"


**DEMETRIUS**

I say I love thee more than he can do.



**LYSANDER**

If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too.



**DEMETRIUS**

Quick, come.



**HERMIA**

Lysander, whereto tends all this?



**LYSANDER**

Away, you Ethiope!



**DEMETRIUS**

No, no. He'll
Seem to break loose, [take][110] on as he would follow,
But yet come not. (To Lysander) You are a tame man, go.

[110]: {{page.q}}=5727 "take on (v.) 1:  behave, act; or: rage, rant"


**LYSANDER**

[Hang][112] off, thou cat, thou [bur][111]r! Vile thing, let loose,
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.

[111]: {{page.q}}=2017 "bur, burr (n.) 3:  clinger, person difficult to shake off"
[112]: {{page.q}}=18401 "hang off (v.):  leave hold, stop clinging"


**HERMIA**

Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,
Sweet love?



**LYSANDER**

Thy love? – out, tawny Tartar, out;
Out, loathed medicine! O hated [potion][113], hence!

[113]: {{page.q}}=12709 "potion (n.) 1:  poison, deadly drink"


**HERMIA**

Do you not jest?



**HELENA**

Yes, sooth, and so do you.



**LYSANDER**

Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.



**DEMETRIUS**

I would I had your [bond][114]; for I perceive
A weak [bond][115] holds you. I'll not trust your word.

[114]: {{page.q}}=1995 "bond (n.) 1:  deed, contract, pledge"
[115]: {{page.q}}=2047 "bond (n.) 4:  [physical] tie, restraint, constraint"


**LYSANDER**

What? Should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so.



**HERMIA**

What? Can you do me greater harm than hate?
Hate me? Wherefore? O me, what news, my love?
Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?
I am as fair now as I was [erewhile][116].
[Since][117] night you loved me; yet since night you left me.
Why then, you left me – O, the gods forbid! –
In earnest, shall I say?

[116]: {{page.q}}=9603 "erewhile (adv.):  a short time ago, a while before"
[117]: {{page.q}}=16441 "since (adv.) 2:  ago"


**LYSANDER**

Ay, by my life;
And never did desire to see thee more.
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt,
Be certain. Nothing truer – 'tis no jest
That I do hate thee and love Helena.



**HERMIA**

O me, you [juggler][119], you [canker-blossom][118],
You thief of love! What, have you come by night
And stolen my love's heart from him?

[118]: {{page.q}}=3990 "canker-blossom (n.):  grub that destroys the blossom [of love]"
[119]: {{page.q}}=18901 "juggler (n.) 2:  trickster, deceiver, fraud"


**HELENA**

Fine, i'faith.
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear
Impatient answers from my [gentle][120] tongue?
Fie, fie, you [counterfeit][121], you puppet, you!

[120]: {{page.q}}=18076 "gentle (adj.) 4:  peaceful, calm, free from violence"
[121]: {{page.q}}=3405 "counterfeit (n.) 2:  impostor, pretender, sham"


**HERMIA**

Puppet? Why so? – Ay, that way goes the game.
Now I perceive that she hath made [compare][122]
Between our statures. She hath urged her height,
And with her personage, her tall personage,
Her height, [forsooth][123], she hath prevailed with him.
And are you grown so high in his esteem
Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak!
How low am I? – I am not yet so low
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.

[122]: {{page.q}}=2889 "compare (n.):  comparison, simile, analogy"
[123]: {{page.q}}=20059 "forsooth (adv.):  in truth, certainly, truly, indeed"


**HELENA**

I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
Let her not hurt me. I was never [curst][124].
I have no gift at all in shrewishness.
I am a [right][125] maid for my cowardice!
Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think
Because she is [something][126] lower than myself
That I can match her....

[124]: {{page.q}}=3144 "curst (adj.) 1:  bad-tempered, quarrelsome, shrewish, cross"
[125]: {{page.q}}=16683 "right (adj.) 1:  typical, true, classic"
[126]: {{page.q}}=14025 "something (adv.) 1:  somewhat, rather"


**HERMIA**

Lower? Hark, again!



**HELENA**

Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
I evermore did love you, Hermia;
Did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you,
Save that in love unto Demetrius
I told him of your [stealth][127] unto this wood.
He followed you. For love I followed him.
But he hath [chid][128] me hence, and threatened me
To strike me, [spurn][129] me – nay, to kill me too.
And now, so you will let me quiet go,
To Athens will I bear my folly back
And follow you no further. Let me go.
You see how simple and how [fond][130] I am.

[127]: {{page.q}}=14636 "stealth (n.) 1:  stealing away, furtive journey, clandestine act"
[128]: {{page.q}}=4464 "chide (v.), past form chid 4:  brusquely command, drive [away] with harsh words"
[129]: {{page.q}}=14317 "spurn (v.) 2:  kick, strike, stamp [on], dash"
[130]: {{page.q}}=20679 "fond (adj.) 2:  foolish, trifling, frivolous"


**HERMIA**

Why, get you gone! Who is't that hinders you?



**HELENA**

A foolish heart that I leave here behind.



**HERMIA**

What, with Lysander?



**HELENA**

With Demetrius.



**LYSANDER**

Be not afraid; she shall not harm thee, Helena.



**DEMETRIUS**

No, sir, She shall not, though you take her part.



**HELENA**

O, when she is angry she is [keen][131] and [shrewd][132].
She was a vixen when she went to school,
And though she be but little, she is fierce.

[131]: {{page.q}}=18979 "keen (adj.) 1:  sharp, cutting, severe"
[132]: {{page.q}}=15923 "shrewd (adj.) 4:  shrewish, bad-tempered, difficult"


**HERMIA**

Little again? Nothing but low and little?
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
Let me come to her.



**LYSANDER**

Get you gone, you dwarf,
You [minimus][134] of hindering [knot-grass][133] made,
You [bead][135], you acorn.

[133]: {{page.q}}=19025 "knot-grass (n.):  species of creeping weed"
[134]: {{page.q}}=10717 "minimus (n.):  tiniest of creatures, insignificant being"
[135]: {{page.q}}=2564 "bead (n.) 1:  tiny thing, smallest of objects"


**DEMETRIUS**

You are too officious
In her behalf that scorns your services.
Let her alone. Speak not of Helena,
Take not her part; for if thou dost intend
Never so little show of love to her,
Thou shalt [aby][136] it.

[136]: {{page.q}}=724 "aby (v.):  suffer for, pay for, atone for"


**LYSANDER**

Now she holds me not.
Now follow – if thou darest – to try whose right
Of thine or mine is most in Helena.



**DEMETRIUS**

Follow? Nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
_Exeunt Demetrius and Lysander_



**HERMIA**

You, mistress – all this [coil][137] is 'long of you.
Nay – go not back.

[137]: {{page.q}}=3613 "coil (n.):  turmoil, disturbance, fuss"


**HELENA**

I will not trust you, I,
Nor longer stay in your [curst][138] company.
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray.
My legs are longer, though, to run away!
_Exit_

[138]: {{page.q}}=3144 "curst (adj.) 1:  bad-tempered, quarrelsome, shrewish, cross"


**HERMIA**

I am amazed, and know not what to say!
_Exit_
_Oberon and Puck come forward_



**OBERON**

This is thy negligence. Still thou mistakest,
Or else committest thy [knaveries][139] wilfully.

[139]: {{page.q}}=19056 "knavery (n.) 1:  roguish trick, rouguery, trickery"


**PUCK**

Believe me, King of [shadow][140]s, I mistook.
Did not you tell me I should know the man
By the Athenian garments he had on?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise
That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes.
And so far am I glad it so did [sort][141],
As this their jangling I esteem a [sport][142].

[140]: {{page.q}}=14715 "shadow (n.) 5:  spirit, phantom, spectre, ghost"
[141]: {{page.q}}=14716 "sort (v.) 6:  turn out, fall out, come about"
[142]: {{page.q}}=16124 "sport (n.) 4:  subject of sport"


**OBERON**

Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
[Hie][143] therefore, Robin, overcast the night.
The starry [welkin][145] cover thou [anon][144]
With drooping fog as black as Acheron,
And lead these testy rivals so astray
As one come not within another's way.
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue,
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter [wrong][146],
And [sometime][148] [rail][147] thou like Demetrius;
And from each other look thou lead them thus
Till o'er their [brow][149]s death-counterfeiting sleep
With leaden legs and [batty][150] wings doth creep.
Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye –
Whose liquor hath this [virtuous][151] property,
To take from thence all error with his might,
And make his eyeballs roll with [wonted][152] sight.
When they next wake, all this derision
Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision,
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend
With league whose [date][153] till death shall never end.
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ
I'll to my Queen and beg her Indian boy,
And then I will her [charmed][154] eye release
From monster's view, and all things shall be peace.

[143]: {{page.q}}=18172 "hie (v.):  hasten, hurry, speed"
[144]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1:  soon, shortly, presently"
[145]: {{page.q}}=7770 "welkin (n.):  sky, firmament, heavens"
[146]: {{page.q}}=7679 "wrong (n.) 2:  insult, offence, slight"
[147]: {{page.q}}=17089 "rail (v.):  rant, rave, be abusive [about]"
[148]: {{page.q}}=14078 "sometime (adv.) 2:  sometimes, now and then"
[149]: {{page.q}}=2299 "brow (n.) 4:  forehead [often plural, referring to the two prominences of the forehead]"
[150]: {{page.q}}=1585 "batty (adj.):  bat-like"
[151]: {{page.q}}=7302 "virtuous (adj.) 1:  potent, powerful, efficacious"
[152]: {{page.q}}=7593 "wonted (adj.):  accustomed, usual, customary"
[153]: {{page.q}}=8807 "date (n.) 1:  duration, period of existence"
[154]: {{page.q}}=4381 "charmed (adj.) 1:  bewitched, enchanted, placed under a spell"


**PUCK**

My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,
And yonder shines Aurora's [harbinger][155],
At whose approach ghosts wandering here and there
Troop home to churchyards. Damned spirits all
That in [crossway][156]s and floods have burial
Already to their wormy beds are gone.
For fear lest day should look their shames upon
They wilfully themselves exile from light,
And must for [aye][157] [consort][158] with black-browed night.

[155]: {{page.q}}=15274 "harbinger (n.):  forerunner, herald, precursor"
[156]: {{page.q}}=3145 "crossway (n.):  cross-road"
[157]: {{page.q}}=90 "aye (adv.):  always, ever, for eternity"
[158]: {{page.q}}=2986 "consort (v.):  accompany, attend, go with"


**OBERON**

But we are spirits of another [sort][159].
I with the morning's love have [oft][160] made [sport][161],
And like a forester the groves may tread
Even till the eastern gate all fiery red
Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams
Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams.
But notwithstanding, haste, make no delay;
We may effect this business yet ere day.
_Exit_

[159]: {{page.q}}=14030 "sort (n.) 1:  class, level, social rank"
[160]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.):  often"
[161]: {{page.q}}=15152 "sport (n.) 3:  sexual recreation, intercourse, amorous dalliance"


**PUCK**

Up and down, up and down,
I will lead them up and down.
I am feared in field and town.
Goblin, lead them up and down.
Here comes one.
_Enter Lysander_



**LYSANDER**

Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.



**PUCK**

_in Demetrius's voice_
Here, villain, drawn and ready! Where art thou?



**LYSANDER**

I will be with thee straight.



**PUCK**

_in Demetrius's voice_
Follow me then
To plainer ground.
_Exit Lysander_
_Enter Demetrius_



**DEMETRIUS**

Lysander, speak again.
Thou runaway, thou coward – art thou fled?
Speak. In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?



**PUCK**

_in Lysander's voice_
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
Telling the bushes that thou lookest for wars,
And wilt not come? Come, [recreant][162]. Come, thou child,
I'll whip thee with a rod. He is defiled
That draws a sword on thee.

[162]: {{page.q}}=16741 "recreant (n.) 1:  coward, faint-hearted individual"


**DEMETRIUS**

Yea, art thou there?



**PUCK**

_in Lysander's voice_
Follow my voice. We'll try no manhood here.
_Exeunt Puck and Demetrius_
_Enter Lysander_



**LYSANDER**

He goes before me, and still dares me on;
When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
The villain is much lighter-heeled than I.
I followed fast, but faster he did fly,
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
And here will rest me. (He lies down) Come, thou gentle day,
For if but once thou show me thy grey light
I'll find Demetrius and revenge this [spite][163].
_He sleeps_
_Enter Puck and Demetrius_

[163]: {{page.q}}=14578 "spite (n.) 1:  annoyance, vexation, irritation"


**PUCK**

_in Lysander's voice_
Ho, ho, ho, coward! Why comest thou not?



**DEMETRIUS**

[Abide][164] me if thou darest, for well I [wot][165]
Thou runnest before me, shifting every place,
And darest not [stand][166] nor look me in the face.
Where art thou now?

[164]: {{page.q}}=511 "abide (v.) 1:  endure, undergo, face"
[165]: {{page.q}}=7655 "wot (v.) 1:  learn, know, be told"
[166]: {{page.q}}=14056 "stand (v.) 4:  stand still, stop, cease moving"


**PUCK**

_in Lysander's voice_
Come hither; I am here.



**DEMETRIUS**

Nay, then thou mockest me. Thou shalt [buy][167] this dear
If ever I thy face by daylight see.
Now, go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
To measure out my length on this cold bed.
By day's approach look to be visited.
_He lies down and sleeps_
_Enter Helena_

[167]: {{page.q}}=2018 "buy (v.):  pay for, suffer the consequences of"


**HELENA**

O weary night! O long and tedious night,
[Abate][168] thy hours, shine comforts from the East,
That I may back to Athens by daylight
From these that my poor company detest.
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,
Steal me awhile from mine own company.
_She lies down and sleeps_

[168]: {{page.q}}=661 "abate (v.) 2:  shorten, lessen, reduce"


**PUCK**

Yet but three? Come one more,
Two of both kinds makes up four.
Here she comes, [curst][169] and [sad][170].
Cupid is a knavish lad
Thus to make poor females mad.
_Enter Hermia_

[169]: {{page.q}}=3144 "curst (adj.) 1:  bad-tempered, quarrelsome, shrewish, cross"
[170]: {{page.q}}=5936 "sad (adj.) 2:  dismal, morose, sullen"


**HERMIA**

Never so weary, never so in woe,
Bedabbled with the dew, and torn with briars –
I can no further crawl, no further go.
My legs can keep no pace with my desires.
Here will I rest me till the break of day.
Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray.
_She lies down and sleeps_



**PUCK**

On the ground
Sleep sound.
I'll apply
To your eye,
[Gentle][171] lover, remedy.
_He squeezes the juice on Lysander's eyes_
When thou wakest,
Thou takest
True delight
In the sight
Of thy former lady's eye.
And the country proverb known,
That every man should take his own,
In your waking shall be shown.
Jack shall have Jill;
Naught shall go [ill][172].
The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.
_Exit_

[171]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6:  soft, tender, kind"
[172]: {{page.q}}=4953 "ill (adv.) 1:  badly, adversely, unfavourably"
[173]: {{page.q}}=799 "act (n.) 6:  play interval, interlude"
