---
title: A Midsummer Night's Dream
tagline: Act IV - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 16:30:33 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/A_Midsummer_Night_Dream_act4_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Quince, Flute, Snout, and Starveling_

**QUINCE**

Have you sent to Bottom's house? Is he come
home yet?



**STARVELING**

He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is
[transported][1].

[1]: {{page.q}}=5729 "transported (adj.):  carried off, taken away"


**FLUTE**

If he come not, then the play is marred. It goes not
forward. Doth it?



**QUINCE**

It is not possible. You have not a man in all
Athens able to [discharge][2] Pyramus but he.

[2]: {{page.q}}=8712 "discharge (v.) 2:  play, perform, execute"


**FLUTE**

No, he hath simply the best [wit][3] of any handicraft
man in Athens.

[3]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"


**QUINCE**

Yea and the best [person][4], too; and he is a very
[paramour][5] for a sweet voice.

[4]: {{page.q}}=12552 "person (n.) 1:  fine figure, personality"
[5]: {{page.q}}=12714 "paramour (n.) 2:  malapropism for ‘paragon’"


**FLUTE**

You must say ‘ paragon.’ A paramour is – God bless
us – a thing of [naught][6].
_Enter Snug the joiner_

[6]: {{page.q}}=11460 "naught, nought (n.) 2:  wickedness, immorality, sinfulness"


**SNUG**

Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple, and
there is two or three lords and ladies more married. If
our [sport][8] had gone forward, we had all been [made][7] men.

[7]: {{page.q}}=10718 "made (adj.) 2:  with success assured, with fortune made"
[8]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"


**FLUTE**

O, sweet [Bully][9] Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence
a day during his life. He could not have [scape][10]d sixpence
a day. An the Duke had not given him sixpence a day for
playing Pyramus, I'll be hanged. He would have deserved
it. Sixpence a day in Pyramus, or nothing.
_Enter Bottom_

[9]: {{page.q}}=2016 "bully (n./adj.):  [especially as a warm form of address] fine fellow, good friend"
[10]: {{page.q}}=14263 "scape, 'scape (v.):  escape, avoid"


**BOTTOM**

Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?



**QUINCE**

Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy
hour!



**BOTTOM**

Masters, I am to [discourse][11] wonders – but ask
me not what; for if I tell you, I am not true Athenian. – I
will tell you everything, [right][12] as it fell out!

[11]: {{page.q}}=8780 "discourse (v.) 2:  relate, talk about, recount"
[12]: {{page.q}}=17088 "right (adv.) 2:  just, precisely"


**QUINCE**

Let us hear, sweet Bottom!



**BOTTOM**

Not a word of me! All that I will tell you is – that
the Duke hath dined. Get your [apparel][13] together, good
strings to your beards, new ribbons to your pumps.
Meet [presently][14] at the palace. Every man look o'er his
part. For the short and the long is, our play is [prefer][15]red.
In any case, let Thisbe have clean linen; and let not him
that plays the lion pare his nails, for they shall hang out
for the lion's claws. And, most dear actors, eat no onions
nor garlic; for we are to [utter][16] sweet breath, and I do
not doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy. No
more words. Away – go, away!
_Exeunt Bottom and his fellows_

[13]: {{page.q}}=37 "apparel (n.):  clothes, clothing, dress"
[14]: {{page.q}}=12248 "presently (adv.) 1:  immediately, instantly, at once"
[15]: {{page.q}}=12338 "prefer (v.) 1:  promote, advance, recommend"
[16]: {{page.q}}=7166 "utter (v.) 1:  emit, exhale, discharge"
