---
title: A Midsummer Night's Dream
tagline: Act IV - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 16:28:10 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/A_Midsummer_Night_Dream_act4_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Titania, and Bottom, and Fairies; and Oberon_

_behind them_

**TITANIA**

Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed
While I thy [amiable][1] cheeks do [coy][2],
And stick muskroses in thy sleek, smooth head,
And kiss thy fair large ears, my [gentle][3] joy.

[1]: {{page.q}}=485 "amiable (adj.) 2:  beloved, desirable, lovable"
[2]: {{page.q}}=3146 "coy (v.) 1:  caress, stroke, pet"
[3]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6:  soft, tender, kind"


**BOTTOM**

Where's Peaseblossom?



**PEASEBLOSSOM**

Ready.



**BOTTOM**

Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Where's
Monsieur Cobweb?



**COBWEB**

Ready.



**BOTTOM**

Monsieur Cobweb, good Monsieur, get you your
weapons in your hand and kill me a red-hipped humble
bee on the top of a thistle; and, good mounsieur, bring
me the honey bag. Do not fret yourself too much in the
action, Monsieur; and, good Monsieur, have a care the
honey bag break not, I would be loath to have you overflown
with a honey bag, signor. Where's Monsieur
Mustardseed?



**MUSTARDSEED**

Ready.



**BOTTOM**

Give me your [neaf][4], Monsieur Mustardseed.
Pray you, leave your [courtesy][5], good Monsieur.

[4]: {{page.q}}=11379 "neaf (n.):  fist, clenched hand"
[5]: {{page.q}}=3633 "courtesy, cur'sy, curtsy (n.) 1:  courteous service, polite behaviour, good manners"


**MUSTARDSEED**

What's your will?



**BOTTOM**

Nothing, good Monsieur, but to help [Cavalery][6]
Cobweb to scratch. I must to the barber's, Monsieur,
for [methinks][8] I am [marvellous][7] hairy about the face. And
I am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me, I
must scratch.

[6]: {{page.q}}=4162 "Cavalery (n.):  cavalier, courtly gentleman"
[7]: {{page.q}}=10411 "marvellous (adv.):  very, extremely, exceedingly"
[8]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"


**TITANIA**

What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?



**BOTTOM**

I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let's have
the [tongs][10] and the [bone][9]s.

[9]: {{page.q}}=1880 "bone (n.) 4:  (plural) pieces of bone [used as a musical instrument]"
[10]: {{page.q}}=5728 "tongs (n.):  type of simple metal musical instrument"


**TITANIA**

Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.



**BOTTOM**

Truly, a [peck][11] of provender. I could munch your
good dry oats. [Methinks][13] I have a great desire to a [bottle][12]
of hay. Good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.

[11]: {{page.q}}=12710 "peck (n.) 1:  heap, quantity, measure [a quarter of a bushel]"
[12]: {{page.q}}=1899 "bottle (n.) 1:  bundle, truss [of hay]"
[13]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"


**TITANIA**

I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
The squirrel's hoard, and fetch thee new nuts.



**BOTTOM**

I had rather have a handful or two of dried [pease][14].
But, I pray you, let none of your people stir me. I have
an [exposition][15] of sleep come upon me.

[14]: {{page.q}}=12711 "pease (n.):  peas"
[15]: {{page.q}}=9884 "exposition (n.):  malapropism for ‘disposition’ [= inclination]"


**TITANIA**

Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.
Fairies be gone, and be all ways away.
_Exeunt Fairies_
So doth the [woodbine][16] the sweet honeysuckle
Gently [entwist][17]; the female ivy so
[Enring][19]s the [barky][18] fingers of the elm.
O, how I love thee! How I dote on thee!
_They sleep. Enter Puck_

[16]: {{page.q}}=8268 "woodbine (n.) 2:  bindweed, convolvulus"
[17]: {{page.q}}=9885 "entwist (v.):  clasp with a twist, entwine, wreathe around"
[18]: {{page.q}}=2556 "barky (adj.):  bark-covered"
[19]: {{page.q}}=9886 "enring (v.):  form a ring round, encircle, surround"


**OBERON**

_comes forward_
Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight?
Her [dotage][20] now I do begin to pity.
For, meeting her of late behind the wood
Seeking sweet [favour][21]s from this hateful fool,
I did upbraid her and fall out with her,
For she his hairy temples then had [round][22]ed
With a [coronet][23] of fresh and fragrant flowers.
And that same dew which [sometime][24] on the buds
Was [wont][26] to swell, like round and [orient][25] pearls,
Stood now within the pretty [floweret][27]s' eyes
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
And she in mild terms begged my patience,
I then did ask of her her [changeling][28] child,
Which [straight][29] she gave me, and her fairy sent
To bear him to my bower in Fairyland.
And now I have the boy I will undo
This hateful imperfection of her eyes.
And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp
From off the head of this Athenian [swain][30],
That, he awaking when the other do,
May all to Athens back again [repair][31]
And think no more of this night's [accident][32]s
But as the [fierce][33] [vexation][34] of a dream.
But first I will release the Fairy Queen.
_to Titania_
Be as thou wast wont to be;
See as thou wast wont to see.
Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower
Hath such force and blessed power.
Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet Queen!

[20]: {{page.q}}=8656 "dotage (n.) 1:  doting, infatuation, excessive affection"
[21]: {{page.q}}=20221 "favour (n.) 5:  mark of favour, gift, token [often a love-token]"
[22]: {{page.q}}=16685 "round (v.) 1:  ring, encircle, surround"
[23]: {{page.q}}=3230 "coronet (n.) 2:  garland, wreath, circlet [of flowers, etc]"
[24]: {{page.q}}=14027 "sometime (adv.) 1:  formerly, at one time, once"
[25]: {{page.q}}=11729 "orient (adj.) 1:  lustrous, brilliant, bright"
[26]: {{page.q}}=7592 "wont (v.):  be accustomed, used [to], be in the habit of"
[27]: {{page.q}}=20182 "floweret (n.):  small flower"
[28]: {{page.q}}=4389 "changeling (n./adj.) 1:  child taken by fairies, stolen child"
[29]: {{page.q}}=14086 "straight (adv.):  straightaway, immediately, at once"
[30]: {{page.q}}=14353 "swain (n.) 1:  [contemptuous] rustic, yokel, fellow"
[31]: {{page.q}}=16609 "repair (v.) 1:  come, go, make one's way"
[32]: {{page.q}}=710 "accident (n.) 1:  occurrence, event, happening"
[33]: {{page.q}}=20183 "fierce (adj.) 2:  wild, lively, violent"
[34]: {{page.q}}=7319 "vexation (n.) 1:  agitation, disturbance, turmoil"


**TITANIA**

_wakes_
My Oberon, what visions have I seen!
[Methought][35] I was enamoured of an ass.

[35]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"


**OBERON**

There lies your love.



**TITANIA**

How came these things to pass?
O, how mine eyes do loathe his [visage][36] now!

[36]: {{page.q}}=7226 "visage (n.) 1:  face, countenance"


**OBERON**

Silence awhile! Robin, take off this head.
Titania, music call, and strike more dead
Than common sleep of all these five the sense.



**TITANIA**

Music, ho! Music such as [charm][37]eth sleep.

[37]: {{page.q}}=4382 "charm (v.) 2:  produce, bring, cause [as by magic]"


**PUCK**

_to Bottom, removing the ass's head_
Now when thou wakest with thine own fool's eyes peep.



**OBERON**

Sound, music! (Music) Come, my Queen, take hands with me,
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
_They dance_
Now thou and I are new in amity,
And will tomorrow midnight [solemnly][38]
Dance in Duke Theseus' house [triumphantly][39],
And bless it to all fair prosperity.
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
Wedded with Theseus all in jollity.

[38]: {{page.q}}=14717 "solemnly (adv.):  ceremoniously, with ritual celebration"
[39]: {{page.q}}=5987 "triumphantly (adv.):  as in a festive pageant, with great celebration"


**PUCK**

Fairy king, [attend][40], and [mark][41]:
I do hear the morning lark.

[40]: {{page.q}}=77 "attend (v.) 7:  listen [to], pay attention [to]"
[41]: {{page.q}}=10405 "mark (v.) 1:  note, pay attention [to], take notice [of]"


**OBERON**

Then, my queen, in silence [sad][42],
Trip we after night's shade.
We the globe can [compass][43] soon,
Swifter than the [wandering][44] moon.

[42]: {{page.q}}=13906 "sad (adj.) 1:  serious, grave, solemn"
[43]: {{page.q}}=3174 "compass (v.) 6:  go around, orbit, make a circuit of"
[44]: {{page.q}}=7956 "wandering (adj.) 1:  [astrology] having its own motion"


**TITANIA**

Come, my lord, and in our flight
Tell me how it came this night
That I sleeping here was found
With these mortals on the ground.
_Exeunt Oberon, Titania, and Puck_
_Horns sound. Enter Theseus with Hippolyta, Egeus,_
_and all his train_



**THESEUS**

Go, one of you; find out the forester;
For now our [observation][45] is performed.
And since we have the [vaward][46] of the day,
My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
[Uncouple][47] in the western valley; let them go.
[Dispatch][48], I say, and find the forester.
_Exit an Attendant_
We will, fair Queen, up to the mountain's top,
And [mark][49] the musical confusion
Of hounds and echo in conjunction.

[45]: {{page.q}}=11761 "observation (n.) 1:  observance, rite, customary practice"
[46]: {{page.q}}=7303 "vaward (n.) 2:  foremost part, front line, vanguard"
[47]: {{page.q}}=6729 "uncouple (v.):  release pairs of hunting dogs for the chase"
[48]: {{page.q}}=8763 "dispatch, despatch (v.) 4:  hurry up, be quick"
[49]: {{page.q}}=10405 "mark (v.) 1:  note, pay attention [to], take notice [of]"


**HIPPOLYTA**

I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,
When in a wood of Crete they [bay][50]ed the bear
With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear
Such gallant [chiding][51], for besides the groves,
The skies, the fountains, every region near
Seemed all one [mutual][52] cry. I never heard
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.

[50]: {{page.q}}=1586 "bay (v.) 1:  bring to bay, drive to a last stand"
[51]: {{page.q}}=4383 "chiding (n.) 2:  barking, brawling, angry noise"
[52]: {{page.q}}=10758 "mutual (adj.) 1:  common, general, omnipresent"


**THESEUS**

My hounds are bred out of the Spartan [kind][53];
So [flewed][54], so [sanded][55]; and their heads are hung
With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
Crook-kneed, and [dewlapped][56] like Thessalian bulls;
Slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells,
Each under each. A [cry][57] more [tuneable][58]
Was never hallooed to nor [cheer][59]ed with horn
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.
Judge when you hear.
_He sees the sleepers_
But soft, what nymphs are these?

[53]: {{page.q}}=15287 "kind (n.) 5:  breed, lineage, stock, family"
[54]: {{page.q}}=20184 "flewed (adj.):  with large cheek folds [flews], chapped"
[55]: {{page.q}}=14637 "sanded (adj.):  sandy-coloured"
[56]: {{page.q}}=8808 "dewlapped (adj.):  with folds of loose skin around the throat"
[57]: {{page.q}}=2784 "cry (n.) 1:  company, pack [as of hounds]"
[58]: {{page.q}}=5974 "tuneable (adj.):  tuneful, musical, melodious"
[59]: {{page.q}}=4395 "cheer (v.):  encourage, urge on, galvanize"


**EGEUS**

My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
And this Lysander; this Demetrius is,
This Helena – old Nedar's Helena.
I wonder of their being here together.



**THESEUS**

No doubt they rose up early to observe
The rite of May, and hearing our [intent][60]
Came here in [grace][61] of our [solemnity][62].
But speak, Egeus: is not this the day
That Hermia should give answer of her choice?

[60]: {{page.q}}=5207 "intent (n.):  intention, purpose, aim"
[61]: {{page.q}}=17514 "grace (n.) 1:  honour, favour, recognition, respect"
[62]: {{page.q}}=14718 "solemnity (n.) 1:  celebration, jubilation, festivity"


**EGEUS**

It is, my lord.



**THESEUS**

Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.
_Horns sound; the lovers wake; shout within; the_
_lovers start up_
Good [morrow][63], friends – Saint Valentine is past!
Begin these woodbirds but to couple now?

[63]: {{page.q}}=10890 "morrow (n.):  morning"


**LYSANDER**

Pardon, my lord.



**THESEUS**

I pray you all, stand up.
I know you two are rival enemies.
How comes this [gentle][64] concord in the world,
That hatred is so far from [jealousy][65]
To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity?

[64]: {{page.q}}=18076 "gentle (adj.) 4:  peaceful, calm, free from violence"
[65]: {{page.q}}=18844 "jealousy (n.) 1:  suspicion, mistrust, apprehension"


**LYSANDER**

My lord, I shall reply amazedly,
Half sleep, half waking. But as yet, I swear,
I cannot truly say how I came here.
But as I think – for truly would I speak –
And now do I [bethink][66] me, so it is:
I came with Hermia hither. Our intent
Was to be gone from Athens where we might
Without the peril of the Athenian law...

[66]: {{page.q}}=1455 "bethink (v.), past form bethought 1:  call to mind, think about, consider, reflect"


**EGEUS**

Enough, enough – my lord, you have enough!
I beg the law, the law upon his head.
They would have stolen away, they would, Demetrius,
Thereby to have [defeat][67]ed you and me –
You of your wife, and me of my consent –
Of my consent that she should be your wife.

[67]: {{page.q}}=8856 "defeat (v.) 2:  frustrate, bring to nought"


**DEMETRIUS**

My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
Of this their [purpose][68] hither to this wood,
And I in fury hither followed them,
Fair Helena in [fancy][69] following me.
But, my good lord – I [wot][70] not by what power,
But by some power it is – my love to Hermia,
Melted as the snow, seems to me now
As the [remembrance][73] of an [idle][72] [gaud][71]
Which in my childhood I did dote upon;
And all the faith, the [virtue][74] of my heart,
The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
Was I betrothed ere I saw Hermia;
But like in sickness did I loathe this food.
But, as in health come to my natural taste,
Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
And will for evermore be true to it.

[68]: {{page.q}}=12449 "purpose (n.) 1:  intention, aim, plan"
[69]: {{page.q}}=20677 "fancy (n.) 1:  love, amorousness, infatuation"
[70]: {{page.q}}=7655 "wot (v.) 1:  learn, know, be told"
[71]: {{page.q}}=17583 "gaud (n.):  gaudy toy, showy plaything, trinket"
[72]: {{page.q}}=4955 "idle (adj.) 1:  useless, barren, worthless"
[73]: {{page.q}}=17226 "remembrance (n.) 1:  memory, bringing to mind, recollection"
[74]: {{page.q}}=7316 "virtue (n.) 2:  essence, heart, soul"


**THESEUS**

Fair lovers, you are fortunately met.
Of this discourse we more will hear [anon][75].
Egeus, I will [overbear][76] your will;
For in the temple by and by with us
These couples shall eternally be knit.
And – for the morning now is [something][77] worn –
Our purposed hunting shall be set aside.
Away with us to Athens. Three and three,
We'll hold a feast in great [solemnity][78].
Come, Hippolyta.
_Exit Theseus with Hippolyta, Egeus, and his train_

[75]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1:  soon, shortly, presently"
[76]: {{page.q}}=11827 "overbear (v.) 2:  overrule, overcome, put down"
[77]: {{page.q}}=14025 "something (adv.) 1:  somewhat, rather"
[78]: {{page.q}}=14718 "solemnity (n.) 1:  celebration, jubilation, festivity"


**DEMETRIUS**

These things seem small and [undistinguishable][79],
Like far-off mountains turned into clouds.

[79]: {{page.q}}=6821 "undistinguishable (adj.):  unrecognizable, undetectable, impossible to pick out"


**HERMIA**

[Methinks][80] I see these things with [parted][81] eye,
When everything seems double.

[80]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[81]: {{page.q}}=12712 "parted (adj.) 1:  divided, unfocused, indistinct"


**HELENA**

So methinks,
And I have found Demetrius, like a jewel,
Mine own and not mine own.



**DEMETRIUS**

Are you sure
That we are awake? It seems to me
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
The Duke was here, and bid us follow him?



**HERMIA**

Yea, and my father.



**HELENA**

And Hippolyta.



**LYSANDER**

And he did bid us follow to the temple.



**DEMETRIUS**

Why, then, we are awake. Let's follow him,
And by the way let's recount our dreams.
_Exeunt Demetrius, Helena, Lysander, and Hermia_
_Bottom wakes_



**BOTTOM**

When my cue comes, call me, and I will answer.
My next is ‘ Most fair Pyramus.’ Heigh ho! Peter
Quince! Flute the bellows-mender! Snout the tinker!
Starveling! God's my life – stolen hence and left me
asleep! – I have had a most rare vision. I have had a
dream past the [wit][82] of man to say what dream it was. Man
is but an ass if he [go about][83] to expound this dream. Methought
I was – there is no man can tell what. [Methought][84]
I was – and methought I had – but man is but a [patched][85]
[fool][86] if he will offer to say what methought I had. The
eye of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not seen,
man's hand is not able to taste, his tongue to [conceive][87],
nor his heart to report what my dream was! I will get
Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream. It shall be
called ‘ Bottom's Dream ’, because it hath no bottom; and
I will sing it in the latter end of a play before the Duke.
[Peradventure][89], to make it the more [gracious][88], I shall sing
it at her death.
_Exit_

[82]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1:  intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[83]: {{page.q}}=17751 "go about (v.) 1:  endeavour, set to work, start trying"
[84]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[85]: {{page.q}}=12713 "patched (adj.):  wearing a patchwork costume, multi-coloured"
[86]: {{page.q}}=20065 "fool (n.) 4:  [professional] clown, jester"
[87]: {{page.q}}=2813 "conceive (v.) 1:  understand, comprehend, follow"
[88]: {{page.q}}=17672 "gracious (adj.) 9:  delightful, lovely, charming"
[89]: {{page.q}}=12174 "peradventure (adv.):  perhaps, maybe, very likely"
