---
title: A Midsummer Night's Dream
tagline: Act V - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-25 16:38:49 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/A_Midsummer_Night_Dream_act5_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Philostrate, Lords, and_

_Attendants_

**HIPPOLYTA**

'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.



**THESEUS**

More strange than true. I never may believe
These [antique][1] fables, nor these fairy [toy][2]s.
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,
Such [shaping][5] [fantasies][4], that [apprehend][3]
More than cool reason ever comprehends.
The lunatic, the lover, and the poet
Are of imagination all [compact][6].
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold.
That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic,
Sees Helen's beauty in a [brow][7] of Egypt.
The poet's eye, in fine frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven.
And as imagination [bodies forth][8]
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.
Such tricks hath strong imagination
That if it would but [apprehend][9] some joy,
It [comprehend][10]s some bringer of that joy.
Or in the night, imagining some fear,
How easy is a bush supposed a bear?

[1]: {{page.q}}=297 "antic, antick(e), antique (adj.) 3:  old-fashioned, old-world, antiquated"
[2]: {{page.q}}=5976 "toy (n.) 7:  foolish story, old wives' tale"
[3]: {{page.q}}=298 "apprehend (v.) 4:  imagine, conceive, invent"
[4]: {{page.q}}=19789 "fantasy (n.) 1:  imagining, delusion, hallucination"
[5]: {{page.q}}=16421 "shaping (adj.):  imaginative, inventive, creative"
[6]: {{page.q}}=2679 "compact (adj.) 2:  made up, composed"
[7]: {{page.q}}=1820 "brow (n.) 1:  appearance, aspect, countenance"
[8]: {{page.q}}=2019 "body forth (v.):  make available to the mind, give mental shape to"
[9]: {{page.q}}=298 "apprehend (v.) 4:  imagine, conceive, invent"
[10]: {{page.q}}=3147 "comprehend (v.) 1:  take in, include, incorporate"


**HIPPOLYTA**

But all the story of the night told over,
And all their minds transfigured so together,
More [witness][12]eth than [fancy][11]'s images,
And grows to something of great [constancy][13];
But, howsoever, strange and [admirable][14].
_Enter the lovers: Lysander, Demetrius, Hermia, and_
_Helena_

[11]: {{page.q}}=19785 "fancy (n.) 3:  imagination, creativity, inventiveness"
[12]: {{page.q}}=7758 "witness (v.) 1:  bear witness to, attest, testify to"
[13]: {{page.q}}=3175 "constancy (n.) 1:  consistency, agreement, uniformity"
[14]: {{page.q}}=299 "admirable (adj.):  wondrous, marvellous, extraordinary"


**THESEUS**

Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.
Joy, [gentle][15] friends, joy and fresh days of love
Accompany your hearts.

[15]: {{page.q}}=17495 "gentle (adj.) 1:  well-born, honourable, noble"


**LYSANDER**

More than to us
Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed.



**THESEUS**

Come now, what masques, what dances shall we have
To wear away this long age of three hours
Between our [after-supper][16] and bedtime?
Where is our usual manager of mirth?
What revels are in hand? Is there no play
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
Call Philostrate.

[16]: {{page.q}}=300 "after-supper (n.):  period of time immediately after dessert [eaten after the main course of the evening meal]"


**PHILOSTRATE**

Here, mighty Theseus.



**THESEUS**

Say, what [abridgement][17] have you for this evening?
What masque, what music? How shall we beguile
The lazy time if not with some delight?

[17]: {{page.q}}=507 "abridgement (n.) 1:  pastime, short entertainment, means of shortening the time"


**PHILOSTRATE**

_giving a paper_
There is a brief how many sports are ripe.
Make choice of which your highness will see first.



**THESEUS**

_The Battle with the Centaurs_
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.’
We'll none of that. That have I told my love
In glory of my kinsman, Hercules.
_The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,_
_Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage._
That is an old [device][18], and it was played
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
_The thrice three Muses mourning for the death_
_Of learning, late deceased in beggary._
That is some satire keen and [critical][19],
Not [sort][20]ing with a nuptial ceremony.
_A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus_
_And his love Thisbe_
Merry and tragical? Tedious and brief?
That is, hot ice and wondrous strange snow.
How shall we find the concord of this discord?

[18]: {{page.q}}=8843 "device (n.) 10:  show, performance, production"
[19]: {{page.q}}=3176 "critical (adj.):  censorious, judgemental, faultfinding"
[20]: {{page.q}}=14031 "sort (v.) 1:  suit, be fitting, be appropriate"


**PHILOSTRATE**

A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
Which is as ‘ brief ’ as I have known a play.
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
Which makes it ‘ tedious.’ For in all the play
There is not one word apt, one player fitted.
And ‘ tragical ’, my noble lord, it is,
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself,
Which when I saw rehearsed, I must confess,
Made mine eyes water: but more ‘ merry ’ tears
The passion of loud laughter never shed.



**THESEUS**

What are they that do play it?



**PHILOSTRATE**

Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
Which never laboured in their minds till now,
And now have [toil][21]ed their [unbreathed][22] memories
With this same play against your nuptial.

[21]: {{page.q}}=5674 "toil (v.):  exhaust, tire out, fatigue"
[22]: {{page.q}}=6810 "unbreathed (adj.):  unpractised, inexperienced, inexpert"


**THESEUS**

And we will hear it.



**PHILOSTRATE**

No, my noble lord,
It is not for you. I have heard it over,
And it is nothing, nothing in the world,
Unless you can find [sport][23] in their [intents][25],
Extremely stretched, and [con][24]ned with cruel [pain][26],
To do you service.

[23]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[24]: {{page.q}}=2691 "con (v.) 1:  learn by heart, commit to memory"
[25]: {{page.q}}=5207 "intent (n.):  intention, purpose, aim"
[26]: {{page.q}}=12314 "pain (n.):  effort, endeavour, exertion, labour"


**THESEUS**

I will hear that play,
For never anything can be amiss
When [simpleness][27] and duty tender it.
Go bring them in; and take your places, ladies.
_Exit Philostrate_

[27]: {{page.q}}=15748 "simpleness (n.) 1:  unpretentiousness, unaffected behaviour, unassuming simplicity"


**HIPPOLYTA**

I love not to see [wretchedness][29] [o'ercharged][28],
And duty in his service perishing.

[28]: {{page.q}}=11873 "overcharged (adj.) 1:  overburdened, overtaxed, overwrought"
[29]: {{page.q}}=7771 "wretchedness (n.):  humble people, the poor, the lowly"


**THESEUS**

Why, [gentle][30] sweet, you shall see no such thing.

[30]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6:  soft, tender, kind"


**HIPPOLYTA**

He says they can do nothing in this kind.



**THESEUS**

The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
Our [sport][31] shall be to [take][32] what they mistake;
And what poor duty cannot do, noble [respect][33]
Takes it in might, not merit.
Where I have come, great [clerk][34]s have purposed
To greet me with premeditated welcomes,
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
Make [period][35]s in the midst of sentences,
Throttle their practised accent in their fears,
And in conclusion dumbly have broke off,
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,
Out of this silence yet I [pick][36]ed a welcome,
And in the modesty of fearful [duty][37]
I read as much as from the rattling tongue
Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied [simplicity][38]
In least speak most, to my [capacity][39].
_Enter Philostrate_

[31]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1:  recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[32]: {{page.q}}=6088 "take (v.) 5:  take in, comprehend, understand"
[33]: {{page.q}}=16945 "respect (n.) 3:  regard, admiration, favour, opinion"
[34]: {{page.q}}=3148 "clerk (n.) 1:  scholar, sage, man of learning"
[35]: {{page.q}}=13199 "period (n.) 3:  rhetorical pause, sentence ending, termination"
[36]: {{page.q}}=13674 "pick (v.) 2:  extract, make out, detect"
[37]: {{page.q}}=9216 "duty (n.) 2:  reverence, due respect, proper attitude"
[38]: {{page.q}}=14638 "simplicity (n.) 1:  sincerity, unpretentiousness, artlessness"
[39]: {{page.q}}=3945 "capacity (n.):  intelligence, understanding, capability"


**PHILOSTRATE**

So please your grace, the Prologue is addressed.



**THESEUS**

Let him approach.
_Flourish of trumpets_
_Enter Quince as Prologue_



**QUINCE**

If we offend it is with our good will.
That you should think we come not to offend
But with good will. To show our simple skill,
That is the true beginning of our end.
Consider then we come but in despite.
We do not come as minding to content you,
Our true [intent][40] is. All for your delight
We are not here. That you should here repent you
The actors are at hand, and by their show
You shall know all that you are [like][41] to know.

[40]: {{page.q}}=5207 "intent (n.):  intention, purpose, aim"
[41]: {{page.q}}=19137 "like (adv.) 1:  likely, probable / probably"


**THESEUS**

This fellow doth not [stand][43] upon [point][42]s.

[42]: {{page.q}}=12772 "point (n.) 5:  trifle, triviality, minor matter"
[43]: {{page.q}}=14487 "stand upon (v.) 1:  make an issue of, insist upon, bother about"


**LYSANDER**

He hath [rid][44] his prologue like a rough colt; he
knows not the [[stop][46]][45]. A good moral, my lord: it is not
enough to speak, but to speak true.

[44]: {{page.q}}=16940 "ride (v.) 2:  manage, conduct, control"
[45]: {{page.q}}=14639 "stop (n.) 3:  [in managing a horse] pulling-up, sudden checking of a career"
[46]: {{page.q}}=14689 "stop (n.) 6:  full-stop, period, full point"


**HIPPOLYTA**

Indeed, he hath played on his prologue like a
child on a recorder – a sound, but not in [government][47].

[47]: {{page.q}}=17639 "government (n.) 1:  control, charge, management"


**THESEUS**

His speech was like a tangled chain: nothing
impaired, but all disordered. Who is next?
_Enter Bottom as Pyramus, Flute as Thisbe, Snout as_
_Wall, Starveling as Moonshine, and Snug as Lion;_
_a trumpeter before them_



**QUINCE**

[Gentle][48]s, [perchance][49] you wonder at this show;
But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
This man is Pyramus, if you would know;
This beauteous lady Thisbe is, certain.
This man with lime and roughcast doth present
Wall – that vile wall which did these lovers [sunder][50];
And through Wall's chink, poor souls, they are [content][51]
To whisper. At the which let no man wonder.
This man with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn
Presenteth Moonshine. For if you will know
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo.
This grisly beast – which Lion [hight][52] by name –
The trusty Thisbe coming first by night
Did scare away, or rather did affright.
And as she fled, her mantle she did [fall][53],
Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
[Anon][54] comes Pyramus – sweet youth and [tall][55] –
And finds his trusty Thisbe's mantle slain.
Whereat with blade – with bloody, blameful blade –
He [bravely][56] [broach][57]ed his boiling bloody breast.
And Thisbe, [tarry][58]ing in mulberry shade,
His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain
At [large][60] [discourse][59] while here they do remain.
_Exeunt Quince, Bottom, Flute, Snug, and Starveling_

[48]: {{page.q}}=17724 "gentle (n.) 2:  (plural) ladies and gentlemen, gentlefolk"
[49]: {{page.q}}=12175 "perchance (adv.) 1:  perhaps, maybe"
[50]: {{page.q}}=14106 "sunder (v.) 1:  separate, split up, part"
[51]: {{page.q}}=2877 "content (adj.) 2:  contented, patient, accepting, undisturbed"
[52]: {{page.q}}=18376 "hight (v.):  [archaism] is called"
[53]: {{page.q}}=19979 "fall (v.) 1:  drop, descend, let fall"
[54]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1:  soon, shortly, presently"
[55]: {{page.q}}=6406 "tall (adj.) 3:  good, fine, capable"
[56]: {{page.q}}=1082 "bravely (adv.) 2:  showily, with great display, with a fine flourish"
[57]: {{page.q}}=1857 "broach (v.) 4:  pierce, impale, spit"
[58]: {{page.q}}=5567 "tarry (v.) 1:  stay, remain, linger"
[59]: {{page.q}}=8780 "discourse (v.) 2:  relate, talk about, recount"
[60]: {{page.q}}=19241 "large, at 1:  at length, in full, thoroughly"


**THESEUS**

I wonder if the lion be to speak.



**DEMETRIUS**

No wonder, my lord – one lion may, when many asses do.



**SNOUT as Wall**

In this same interlude it doth befall
That I – one Snout by name – present a wall.
And such a wall as I would have you think
That had in it a [crannied][61] hole or chink,
Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe,
Did whisper often, very secretly.
This loam, this roughcast, and this stone doth show
That I am that same wall; the truth is so.
And this the cranny is, right and [sinister][62],
Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.

[61]: {{page.q}}=2910 "crannied (adj.):  cracked, split, holed"
[62]: {{page.q}}=15736 "sinister (adj.) 1:  left"


**THESEUS**

Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?



**DEMETRIUS**

It is the [wittiest][64] [partition][63] that ever I heard
[discourse][65], my lord.
_Enter Bottom as Pyramus_

[63]: {{page.q}}=12715 "partition (n.) 2:  wall, dividing structure; also: section of a learned book"
[64]: {{page.q}}=7772 "witty (adj.) 2:  intelligent, ingenious, sensible"
[65]: {{page.q}}=8513 "discourse (v.) 1:  talk, chat, converse"


**THESEUS**

Pyramus draws near the wall. Silence!



**BOTTOM as Pyramus**

O grim-looked night, O night with hue so black,
O night which ever art when day is not!
O night, O night, alack, alack, alack,
I fear my Thisbe's promise is forgot.
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
That standest between her father's ground and mine,
Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
Show me thy chink to blink through with mine [eyne][66].
_Wall holds up his fingers_
Thanks, courteous wall; Jove shield thee well for this.
But what see I? No Thisbe do I see.
O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss:
Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me!

[66]: {{page.q}}=9686 "eyne (n.):  [archaism] eyes"


**THESEUS**

The wall, [methinks][67], being [sensible][68], should curse
[again][69].

[67]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.):  it seems /seemed to me"
[68]: {{page.q}}=14450 "sensible (adj.) 1:  sensitive, responsive, capable of feeling"
[69]: {{page.q}}=200 "again (adv.) 1:  in return, back [in response]"


**BOTTOM**

No, in truth sir, he should not. ‘Deceiving me' is
Thisbe's cue. She is to enter now, and I am to spy her
through the wall. You shall see – it will fall [pat][70] as I told
you. Yonder she comes.
_Enter Flute as Thisbe_

[70]: {{page.q}}=12716 "pat (adv.) 3:  precisely, just, exactly"


**FLUTE as Thisbe**

O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans
For parting my fair Pyramus and me.
My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones,
Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.



**BOTTOM as Pyramus**

I see a voice. Now will I to the chink
To spy [an][71] I can hear my Thisbe's face.
Thisbe!

[71]: {{page.q}}=1253 "and, an (conj.) 3:  if, whether"


**FLUTE as Thisbe**

My love! Thou art my love, I think?



**BOTTOM as Pyramus**

Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace,
And like Limander am I trusty [still][72].

[72]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1:  constantly, always, continually"


**FLUTE as Thisbe**

And I like Helen till the Fates me kill.



**BOTTOM as Pyramus**

Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.



**FLUTE as Thisbe**

As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.



**BOTTOM as Pyramus**

O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall!



**FLUTE as Thisbe**

I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.



**BOTTOM as Pyramus**

Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straight way?



**FLUTE as Thisbe**

Tide life, tide death, I come without delay.
_Exeunt Bottom and Flute_



**SNOUT as Wall**

Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so;
And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.
_Exit_



**THESEUS**

Now is the [mural][73] down between the two
neighbours.

[73]: {{page.q}}=10719 "mural (n.):  [disputed reading] wall"
[74]: {{page.q}}=10759 "mure (n.):  wall"


**DEMETRIUS**

No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful
to hear without warning.



**HIPPOLYTA**

This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.



**THESEUS**

The best in this kind are but shadows; and the
worst are no worse, if imagination amend them.



**HIPPOLYTA**

It must be your imagination then, and not
theirs.



**THESEUS**

If we imagine no worse of them than they of
themselves, they may pass for excellent men. Here come
two noble beasts in: a man and a lion.
_Enter Snug as Lion and Starveling as Moonshine_



**SNUG as Lion**

You, ladies – you whose gentle hearts do fear
The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor –
May now, [perchance][75], both quake and tremble here,
When Lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
Then know that I as Snug the joiner am
A lion [fell][76], nor else no lion's dam,
For if I should as lion come in strife
Into this place, 'twere pity on my life.

[75]: {{page.q}}=12175 "perchance (adv.) 1:  perhaps, maybe"
[76]: {{page.q}}=19813 "fell (adj.) 1:  cruel, fierce, savage"


**THESEUS**

A very [gentle][77] beast, of a good conscience.

[77]: {{page.q}}=17496 "gentle (adj.) 2:  courteous, friendly, kind"


**DEMETRIUS**

The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I.
saw.



**LYSANDER**

This lion is a very fox for his valour.



**THESEUS**

True; and a goose for his discretion.



**DEMETRIUS**

Not so, my lord; for his valour cannot carry
his discretion; and the fox carries the goose.



**THESEUS**

His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his
valour; for the goose carries not the fox. It is well: leave
it to his discretion, and let us listen to the moon.



**STARVELING as Moonshine**

This lanthorn doth the horned moon present.



**DEMETRIUS**

He should have worn the horns on his head.



**THESEUS**

He is no [crescent][78], and his horns are invisible
within the circumference.

[78]: {{page.q}}=3149 "crescent (n.):  waxing moon, growing person"


**STARVELING as Moonshine**

This lanthorn doth the horned moon present;
Myself the man i'th' moon do seem to be.



**THESEUS**

This is the greatest error of all the rest; the man
should be put into the lanthorn. How is it else the man
i'th' moon?



**DEMETRIUS**

He dares not come there, for the candle. For,
you see, it is already in [snuff][79].

[79]: {{page.q}}=14640 "snuff, in:  in need of snuffing out; also: in a rage"


**HIPPOLYTA**

I am aweary of this moon. Would he would change.
I am aweary of this moon. Would he would



**THESEUS**

It appears by his small light of discretion that
he is in the wane. But yet in courtesy, in all reason, we
must stay the time.



**LYSANDER**

Proceed, Moon.



**STARVELING**

All that I have to say is to tell you that the
lantern is the moon, I the man i'th' moon, this thorn
bush my thorn bush, and this dog my dog.



**DEMETRIUS**

Why, all these should be in the lantern; for
all these are in the moon. But, silence: here comes Thisbe.
_Enter Flute as Thisbe_



**FLUTE as Thisbe**

This is old Ninny's tomb. Where is my love?



**SNUG as Lion**

O!
_Lion roars. Flute as Thisbe runs off_



**DEMETRIUS**

Well roared, Lion!



**THESEUS**

Well run, Thisbe!



**HIPPOLYTA**

Well shone, Moon! Truly, the moon shines
with a good grace.
_Lion tears Thisbe's mantle. Exit_



**THESEUS**

Well moused, Lion!



**DEMETRIUS**

And then came Pyramus.



**LYSANDER**

And so the lion vanished.
_Enter Bottom as Pyramus_



**BOTTOM as Pyramus**

Sweet moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams;
I thank thee, moon, for shining now so bright;
For by thy gracious, golden, glittering beams
I trust to take of truest Thisbe sight.
But stay – O spite!
But [mark][80], poor Knight,
What dreadful [dole][81] is here?
Eyes, do you see? –
How can it be?
O dainty duck, O dear!
Thy mantle good –
What, stained with blood!
Approach, ye Furies fell.
O Fates, come, come,
Cut thread and [thrum][82],
[Quail][83], crush, conclude, and [quell][84].

[80]: {{page.q}}=10405 "mark (v.) 1:  note, pay attention [to], take notice [of]"
[81]: {{page.q}}=8459 "dole (n.) 1:  grief, sorrow, sadness"
[82]: {{page.q}}=5731 "thrum (n.):  unwoven end of a warp-thread on a loom"
[83]: {{page.q}}=13783 "quail (v.) 1:  overpower, destroy, make an end"
[84]: {{page.q}}=13784 "quell (v.) 2:  kill, destroy, slay"


**THESEUS**

This [passion][85], and the death of a dear friend,
would go near to make a man look [sad][86].

[85]: {{page.q}}=12161 "passion (n.) 5:  passionate outburst, emotional passage"
[86]: {{page.q}}=13906 "sad (adj.) 1:  serious, grave, solemn"


**HIPPOLYTA**

[Beshrew][87] my heart, but I pity the man.

[87]: {{page.q}}=1534 "beshrew, 'shrew (v.) 1:  curse, devil take, evil befall"


**BOTTOM as Pyramus**

O wherefore, nature, didst thou lions frame,
Since lion vile hath here deflowered my dear?
Which is – no, no, which was – the fairest [dame][88]
That lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with [cheer][89].
Come tears, confound;
Out sword, and wound
The pap of Pyramus.
Ay, that left pap,
Where heart doth hop.
Thus die I – thus, thus, thus.
_He stabs himself_
Now am I dead,
Now am I fled;
My soul is in the sky;
Tongue, lose thy light;
Moon, take thy flight;
_Exit Starveling as Moonshine_
Now die, die, die, die, die.
_He dies_

[88]: {{page.q}}=9481 "dame (n.) 3:  lady, mistress, woman of rank"
[89]: {{page.q}}=4316 "cheer (n.) 4:  face, look, expression"


**DEMETRIUS**

No [die][91], but an [ace][90] for him; for he is but one.

[90]: {{page.q}}=725 "ace (n.):  one [lowest score on a dice]"
[91]: {{page.q}}=8809 "die (n.):  one of a pair of dice"


**LYSANDER**

Less than an ace, man; for he is dead. He is
[nothing][92].

[92]: {{page.q}}=11554 "nothing (n.) 1:  [state of] nothingness, oblivion, extinction"


**THESEUS**

With the help of a [surgeon][93] he might yet recover,
and prove an ass.

[93]: {{page.q}}=14719 "surgeon (n.):  doctor, physician"


**HIPPOLYTA**

How chance Moonshine is gone before
Thisbe comes back and finds her lover?



**THESEUS**

She will find him by starlight. Here she comes;
and her [passion][94] ends the play.
_Enter Flute as Thisbe_

[94]: {{page.q}}=12161 "passion (n.) 5:  passionate outburst, emotional passage"


**HIPPOLYTA**

Methinks she should not use a long one for
such a Pyramus. I hope she will be brief.



**DEMETRIUS**

A [mote][95] will turn the balance which Pyramus,
which Thisbe is the better – he for a man, God [warrant][96]
us; she for a woman, God bless us.

[95]: {{page.q}}=10476 "mote (n.):  speck of dust, tiny particle, trifle"
[96]: {{page.q}}=7551 "warrant (v.) 6:  protect, preserve, keep safe"


**LYSANDER**

She hath spied him already, with those sweet
eyes.



**DEMETRIUS**

And thus she [mean][97]s, videlicet:

[97]: {{page.q}}=10750 "mean (v.) 3:  lament, mourn, make complaint"


**FLUTE as Thisbe**

Asleep, my love?
What, dead, my dove?
O Pyramus, arise.
Speak, speak. Quite dumb?
Dead, dead? A tomb
Must cover thy sweet eyes.
These lily lips,
This cherry nose,
These yellow cowslip cheeks
Are gone, are gone.
Lovers, make moan –
His eyes were green as leeks.
O sisters three,
Come, come to me
With hands as pale as milk;
Lay them in gore,
Since you have shore
With shears his thread of silk.
Tongue, not a word!
Come, trusty sword,
Come blade, my breast [imbrue][98].
_She stabs herself_
And farewell friends.
Thus Thisbe ends.
Adieu, adieu, adieu!
_She dies_

[98]: {{page.q}}=5038 "imbrue, embrue (v.):  pierce, stab, stain with blood"


**THESEUS**

Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.



**DEMETRIUS**

Ay, and Wall too.



**BOTTOM**

_starting up_
No, I assure you, the wall is down
that parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the
epilogue, or to hear a Bergomask dance between two of
our company?



**THESEUS**

No epilogue, I pray you; for your play needs no
[excuse][99]. Never excuse; for when the players are all dead,
there needs none to be blamed. Marry, if he that writ it
had played Pyramus and hanged himself in Thisbe's
garter, it would have been a fine tragedy. And so it is,
truly, and very notably [discharge][100]d. But come, your
Bergomask; let your epilogue alone.
_A dance. Exeunt Bottom and his fellows_
The iron tongue of midnight hath [told][101] twelve.
Lovers, to bed; 'tis almost fairy time.
I fear we shall [outsleep][103] the coming [morn][102]
As much as we this night have [overwatch][104]ed.
This [palpable-gross][105] play hath well beguiled
The [heavy][107] [gait][106] of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
A fortnight hold we this solemnity
In [nightly][108] revels and new jollity.
_Exeunt Theseus, Hippolyta, Philostrate,_
_Demetrius, Helena, Lysander, Hermia,_
_Lords, and Attendants_
_Enter Puck_

[99]: {{page.q}}=9814 "excuse (v.) 1:  explain, give reasons [for]"
[100]: {{page.q}}=8712 "discharge (v.) 2:  play, perform, execute"
[101]: {{page.q}}=5434 "tell (v.) 1:  count out, number, itemize"
[102]: {{page.q}}=10474 "morn (n.):  morning, dawn"
[103]: {{page.q}}=11779 "outsleep (v.):  sleep beyond [a time], sleep in"
[104]: {{page.q}}=11762 "overwatch (v.):  stay up late, remain awake"
[105]: {{page.q}}=12717 "palpable-gross (adj.):  obviously clumsy, plainly ignorant"
[106]: {{page.q}}=17974 "gait (n.) 1:  manner of walking, bearing, movement"
[107]: {{page.q}}=18397 "heavy (adj.) 7:  slow-moving, sluggish, laggard"
[108]: {{page.q}}=21246 "nightly (adj.) 1:  of the night, active at night"


**PUCK**

Now the hungry lion roars
And the wolf [behowl][109]s the moon,
Whilst the [heavy][110] ploughman snores
All with weary task [fordone][111].
Now the [wasted][112] brands do glow
Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
Puts the wretch that lies in woe
In [remembrance][113] of a shroud.
Now it is the time of night
That the graves, all gaping wide,
Every one lets forth his sprite
In the churchway paths to glide.
And we fairies, that do run
By the triple Hecate's team,
From the presence of the sun
Following darkness like a dream,
Now are [frolic][114]. Not a mouse
Shall disturb this hallowed house.
I am sent with broom before
To sweep the dust behind the door.
_Enter Oberon and Titania, with all their train_

[109]: {{page.q}}=1587 "behowl (v.):  howl at, bay, cry out to"
[110]: {{page.q}}=18377 "heavy (adj.) 4:  weary, exhausted, worn out"
[111]: {{page.q}}=20186 "foredone (adj.):  exhausted, tired out, worn out"
[112]: {{page.q}}=7773 "wasted (adj.) 1:  spent, consumed, burnt-out"
[113]: {{page.q}}=17226 "remembrance (n.) 1:  memory, bringing to mind, recollection"
[114]: {{page.q}}=20187 "frolic (adj.):  frolicsome, merry, frisky"


**OBERON**

Through the house give glimmering light
By the dead and drowsy fire;
Every elf and fairy sprite
Hop as light as bird from briar,
And this [ditty][115] after me
Sing, and dance it trippingly.

[115]: {{page.q}}=8854 "ditty (n.) 1:  song"


**TITANIA**

First [rehearse][116] your song by rote,
To each word a warbling note.
Hand in hand with fairy grace
Will we sing and bless this place.
_Song and dance_

[116]: {{page.q}}=16849 "rehearse (v.) 2:  pronounce, speak, utter"


**OBERON**

Now until the break of day
Through this house each fairy stray.
To the best bride bed will we,
Which by us shall blessed be;
And the [issue][117] there create
Ever shall be fortunate.
So shall all the couples three
Ever true in loving be,
And the blots of nature's hand
Shall not in their issue stand.
Never mole, harelip, nor scar,
Nor [mark][118] [prodigious][119], such as are
Despised in nativity,
Shall upon their children be.
With this field dew [consecrate][120]
Every fairy take his [gait][121],
And each [several][122] chamber bless
Through this palace with sweet peace;
And the owner of it blessed
Ever shall in safety rest.
Trip away; make no stay.
Meet me all by break of day.
_Exeunt Oberon, Titania, and their train_

[117]: {{page.q}}=4896 "issue (n.) 1:  child(ren), offspring, family, descendant"
[118]: {{page.q}}=10720 "mark (n.) 6:  birthmark, discolouration, blemish"
[119]: {{page.q}}=12718 "prodigious (adj.) 1:  ominous, portentous, promising evil"
[120]: {{page.q}}=3150 "consecrate (adj.):  consecrated, blessed, sanctified"
[121]: {{page.q}}=17478 "gait (n.) 2:  proceedings, course, doings, steps"
[122]: {{page.q}}=13898 "several (adj.) 1:  separate, different, distinct"


**PUCK**

_to the audience_
If we shadows have offended,
Think but this, and all is mended:
That you have but slumbered here
While these visions did appear.
And this [weak][123] and idle theme,
No more yielding but a dream,
[Gentle][124]s, do not [reprehend][125].
If you pardon, we will mend.
And, as I am an honest Puck,
If we have unearned luck
Now to '[scape][126] the serpent's tongue
We will make amends ere long,
Else the Puck a liar call.
So, good night unto you all.
Give me your hands if we be friends,
And Robin shall restore amends.
_Exit_

[123]: {{page.q}}=8042 "weak (adj.) 1:  of little worth, wanting, deficient"
[124]: {{page.q}}=17724 "gentle (n.) 2:  (plural) ladies and gentlemen, gentlefolk"
[125]: {{page.q}}=16908 "reprehend (v.) 1:  reprove, censure, rebuke"
[126]: {{page.q}}=14263 "scape, 'scape (v.):  escape, avoid"
