---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act I - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 13:42:07 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act1_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Capulet, County Paris, and the Clown, a_

_Servant_

**CAPULET**

But Montague is [bound][1] as well as I,
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

[1]: {{page.q}}=2191 "bound (adj.) 2: obliged, required, forced"


**PARIS**

Of honourable [reckoning][2] are you both,
And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
But now, my lord, what say you to my [suit][3]?

[2]: {{page.q}}=17310 "reckoning (n.) 5: esteem, estimation, distinction"
[3]: {{page.q}}=14102 "suit (n.) 1: formal request, entreaty, petition"


**CAPULET**

But saying o'er what I have said before:
My child is yet a stranger in the world;
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,
Let two more summers wither in their pride,
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.



**PARIS**

Younger than she are happy mothers made.



**CAPULET**

And too soon marred are those so early made.
Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
She's the [hopeful][4] lady of my earth.
But woo her, [gentle][5] Paris, get her heart.
My will to her consent is but a part,
And, she agreed, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair [according][6] [voice][7].
This night I hold an old accustomed feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Such as I love; and you among the [store][8],
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Such comfort as do [lusty][9] young men feel
When [well-apparelled][10] April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
[Inherit][11] at my house. Hear all; all see;
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
May stand in number, though in [reckoning][12] none.
_Come, go with me. (To Servant) Go, sirrah, trudge about_
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
_Exeunt Capulet and Paris_

[4]: {{page.q}}=18832 "hopeful (adj.) 1: promising, giving hope of success"
[5]: {{page.q}}=17495 "gentle (adj.) 1: well-born, honourable, noble"
[6]: {{page.q}}=882 "according (adj.): agreeing, assenting"
[7]: {{page.q}}=7229 "voice (n.) 2: support, approval, good word"
[8]: {{page.q}}=15970 "store (n.) 4: group, company, assembly"
[9]: {{page.q}}=19165 "lusty (adj.) 5: lustful, sensual, sexful"
[10]: {{page.q}}=5797 "well-apparelled (adj.): well-dressed, nicely adorned"
[11]: {{page.q}}=5030 "inherit (v.) 1: receive, obtain, come into possession [of]"
[12]: {{page.q}}=17261 "reckoning (n.) 1: counting up, enumeration, calculation"


**SERVANT**

Find them out whose names are written here! It
is written that the shoemaker should [meddle][13] with his
[yard][17] and the tailor with his [last][15], the [fisher][14] with his [pencil][16]
and the painter with his nets. But I am sent to find those
persons whose names are here writ, and can never find
what names the writing person hath here writ. I must
to the learned. In good [time][18]!
_Enter Benvolio and Romeo_

[13]: {{page.q}}=11099 "meddle (v.) 2: busy oneself, concern oneself"
[14]: {{page.q}}=20071 "fisher (n.): fisherman"
[15]: {{page.q}}=19630 "last (n.) 5: wooden model of the foot, for shaping shoes"
[16]: {{page.q}}=13422 "pencil (n.): finely-pointed paint-brush"
[17]: {{page.q}}=8340 "yard (n.) 1: yard measure"
[18]: {{page.q}}=6271 "time, in good 1: at the right moment"


**BENVOLIO**

Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning.
One pain is lessened by another's anguish.
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning.
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the [rank][19] poison of the old will die.

[19]: {{page.q}}=17311 "rank (adj.) 3: foul, festering, diseased"


**ROMEO**

Your [plantain][20] leaf is excellent for that.

[20]: {{page.q}}=13423 "plantain (n.): variety of medicinal herb"


**BENVOLIO**

For what, I pray thee?



**ROMEO**

For your broken shin.



**BENVOLIO**

Why, Romeo, art thou mad?



**ROMEO**

Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipped and tormented and – Good-e'en, good fellow.



**SERVANT**

God gi' good-e'en. I pray, sir, can you read?



**ROMEO**

Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.



**SERVANT**

Perhaps you have learned it without [book][21]. But
I pray, can you read anything you see?

[21]: {{page.q}}=2276 "book, without: off by heart, by rote"


**ROMEO**

Ay, if I know the letters and the language.



**SERVANT**

Ye say honestly. Rest you merry.



**ROMEO**

Stay, fellow. I can read.
_He reads the letter_
_Signor Martino and his wife and daughters. County Anselm_
_and his beauteous sisters. The lady widow of Utruvio._
_Signor Placentio and his lovely nieces. Mercutio and his_
_brother Valentine. Mine uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters._
_My fair niece Rosaline and Livia. Signor Valentio and_
_his cousin Tybalt. Lucio and the lively Helena._
A fair assembly. Whither should they come?



**SERVANT**

Up.



**ROMEO**

Whither? To supper?



**SERVANT**

To our house.



**ROMEO**

Whose house?



**SERVANT**

My master's.



**ROMEO**

Indeed I should have asked thee that before.



**SERVANT**

Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is
the great rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house of
Montagues, I pray come and [crush][22] a cup of wine. Rest
you merry.
_Exit Servant_

[22]: {{page.q}}=3771 "crush (v.) 1: drink down, quaff, knock back"


**BENVOLIO**

At this same [ancient][23] feast of Capulet's
[Sup][24]s the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves,
With all the [admired][25] beauties of Verona.
Go thither, and, with [unattainted][26] eye
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

[23]: {{page.q}}=225 "ancient, aunchient (adj.) 1: long-established, long-standing"
[24]: {{page.q}}=14508 "sup (v.) 1: have supper"
[25]: {{page.q}}=876 "admired (adj.) 2: regarded with admiration, wondered at"
[26]: {{page.q}}=7069 "unattainted (adj.): dispassionate, detached, unprejudiced"


**ROMEO**

When the devout [religion][27] of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
And these, who often drowned, could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

[27]: {{page.q}}=17134 "religion (n.) 1: religious observance, spiritual duty, obligation"


**BENVOLIO**

Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself [poise][28]d with herself in either eye.
But in that crystal scales let there be weighed
Your lady's love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall [scant][29] show well that now seems best.

[28]: {{page.q}}=12317 "poise (v.): balance, weigh, make even"
[29]: {{page.q}}=15971 "scant (adv.): scarcely, barely, hardly"


**ROMEO**

I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendour of mine own.
_Exeunt_



