---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act I - Scene IV
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 13:46:38 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act1_scene4.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six_

_other maskers, and torchbearers_

**ROMEO**

What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without apology?



**BENVOLIO**

The [date][1] is [out][2] of such [prolixity][3].
We'll have no Cupid [hoodwink][4]ed with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of [lath][5],
Scaring the ladies like a [crowkeeper][6];
Nor no without-book prologue, [faintly][7] spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance.
But, let them measure us by what they will,
We'll [measure][9] them a measure and be gone.

[1]: {{page.q}}=9304 "date (n.) 2: time, season, fashion"
[2]: {{page.q}}=12011 "out (adv.) 10: out-of-date, not in vogue [for]"
[3]: {{page.q}}=13392 "prolixity (n.): long-windedness, tedious exposition"
[4]: {{page.q}}=18646 "hoodwink (v.) 1: blindfold, cover one's eyes"
[5]: {{page.q}}=19287 "lath (n.) 1: thin wood"
[6]: {{page.q}}=3772 "crowkeeper, crow-keeper (n.): scarecrow, farmer's boy, person who keeps crows away"
[7]: {{page.q}}=20018 "faintly (adv.) 3: weakly, feebly, faintheartedly"
[8]: {{page.q}}=11029 "measure (n.) 8: slow stately dance, graceful movement"
[9]: {{page.q}}=11102 "measure (v.) 2: apportion, dispense, give out"


**ROMEO**

Give me a torch. I am not for this [ambling][10].
Being but [heavy][11], I will bear the light.

[10]: {{page.q}}=891 "ambling (n.): affected way of walking, tripping along"
[11]: {{page.q}}=18220 "heavy (adj.) 1: sorrowful, sad, gloomy"


**MERCUTIO**

Nay, [gentle][12] Romeo, we must have you dance.

[12]: {{page.q}}=17495 "gentle (adj.) 1: well-born, honourable, noble"


**ROMEO**

Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
With nimble soles. I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.



**MERCUTIO**

You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
And soar with them above a common bound.



**ROMEO**

I am too [sore][15] [empierce][13]d with his [shaft][14]
To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
I cannot bound a [pitch][17] above [dull][16] woe.
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.

[13]: {{page.q}}=10221 "empierce (v.): pierce through, transfix, impale"
[14]: {{page.q}}=14661 "shaft (n.): [long and slender] arrow"
[15]: {{page.q}}=14925 "sore (adv.) 1: seriously, greatly, very much"
[16]: {{page.q}}=8928 "dull (adj.) 3: gloomy, melancholic, sullen"
[17]: {{page.q}}=13103 "pitch (n.) 1: height [to which a bird of prey soars before swooping]"


**MERCUTIO**

And, to sink in it, should you burden love –
Too great oppression for a tender thing.



**ROMEO**

Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too [boisterous][18], and it pricks like thorn.

[18]: {{page.q}}=2412 "boisterous (adj.) 4: painful, hurtful, rough on the feelings"


**MERCUTIO**

If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
[Prick][19] love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a [case][20] to put my [visage][21] in.
A [visor][22] for a visor! What care I
What [curious][23] eye doth [quote][24] deformities?
Here are the [beetle][25] [brow][26]s shall blush for me.

[19]: {{page.q}}=13424 "prick (v.) 4: torment, vex, grieve"
[20]: {{page.q}}=4243 "case (n.) 8: mask, disguise, covering"
[21]: {{page.q}}=7226 "visage (n.) 1: face, countenance"
[22]: {{page.q}}=7384 "visor (n.): mask"
[23]: {{page.q}}=3620 "curious (adj.) 4: careful, fastidious, attentive"
[24]: {{page.q}}=13749 "quote (v.) 1: closely observe, note, examine"
[25]: {{page.q}}=1756 "beetle (adj.): overhanging, prominent, bushy"
[26]: {{page.q}}=1915 "brow (n.) 3: eyebrow"


**BENVOLIO**

Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
But every man [betake][27] him to his legs.

[27]: {{page.q}}=1713 "betake (v.) 2: resort, have recourse, commit oneself"


**ROMEO**

A torch for me! Let [wanton][28]s light of heart
Tickle the [senseless][29] rushes with their heels.
For I am [proverb][31]ed with a [grandsire][30] phrase –
I'll be a candle-holder and look on;
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.

[28]: {{page.q}}=7648 "wanton (n.) 1: libertine, seducer"
[29]: {{page.q}}=13958 "senseless (adj.) 1: lacking human sensation, incapable of feeling"
[30]: {{page.q}}=18044 "grandsire (adj.): long-established, old-fashioned"
[31]: {{page.q}}=13425 "proverb (v.): provide with worldly wisdom [by]"


**MERCUTIO**

Tut, [dun's][32] the mouse, the constable's own word!
If thou art [Dun][33], we'll draw thee from the mire
Of – save your [reverence][34] – love, wherein thou stickest
Up to the ears. Come, we [burn][35] daylight, ho!

[32]: {{page.q}}=9305 "dun's the mouse: [proverbial] keep quiet, be still"
[33]: {{page.q}}=9600 "Dun (n.): horse's name [involving the lifting of a log ‘horse’ in a Christmas game called ‘drawing dun out of the mire’]"
[34]: {{page.q}}=14428 "sir-reverence (n.): save your reverence"
[35]: {{page.q}}=2023 "burn (v.) 4: waste, fritter away"


**ROMEO**

Nay, that's not so.



**MERCUTIO**

I mean, sir, in delay
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Take our [good][36] meaning, for our judgement sits
Five times in that ere once in our five [wits][37].

[36]: {{page.q}}=18045 "good (adj.) 8: intended, right, proper"
[37]: {{page.q}}=8049 "wits, also five wits: faculties of the mind (common wit, imagination, fantasy, estimation, memory) or body (the five senses)"


**ROMEO**

And we mean well in going to this masque,
But 'tis no [wit][38] to go.

[38]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1: intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"


**MERCUTIO**

Why, may one ask?



**ROMEO**

I dreamt a dream [tonight][39].

[39]: {{page.q}}=5571 "tonight (adv.): last night, this past night"


**MERCUTIO**

And so did I.



**ROMEO**

Well, what was yours?



**MERCUTIO**

That dreamers often lie.



**ROMEO**

In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.



**MERCUTIO**

O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little [atomies][40]
Over men's noses as they lie asleep.
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
Her wagon spokes made of long [spinner][41]s' legs;
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Her traces, of the smallest spider web;
Her collars, of the moonshine's watery beams;
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of [film][42];
Her [wagoner][43], a small grey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.
And in this [state][44] she gallops night by night
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on [curtsies][45] [straight][46];
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which [oft][47] the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a [suit][48].
And sometime comes she with a [tithe-pig][49]'s tail
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep;
Then he dreams of another [benefice][50].
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck;
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, [ambuscado][51]s, Spanish blades,
Of [health][53]s five fathom deep; and then [anon][52]
Drums in his ear, at which he [start][54]s and wakes,
And being thus [fright][55]ed, swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plaits the manes of horses in the night
And [bake][56]s the [elf-lock][57]s in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes.
This is the [hag][58], when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and [learn][59]s them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage.
This is she –

[40]: {{page.q}}=1273 "atomy (n.) 2: mite, tiny being"
[41]: {{page.q}}=15974 "spinner (n.): spider, cranefly, daddy-longlegs"
[42]: {{page.q}}=20595 "film (n.): gossamer, fine thread"
[43]: {{page.q}}=5802 "waggoner, wagoner (n.): driver, charioteer"
[44]: {{page.q}}=14626 "state (n.) 4: splendour, magnificence, stateliness, dignity"
[45]: {{page.q}}=3767 "courtesy, cur'sy, curtsy (n.) 2: curtsy, bow, gesture of respect"
[46]: {{page.q}}=14086 "straight (adv.): straightaway, immediately, at once"
[47]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.): often"
[48]: {{page.q}}=14102 "suit (n.) 1: formal request, entreaty, petition"
[49]: {{page.q}}=6425 "tithe-pig (n.): pig given as part of a tithe"
[50]: {{page.q}}=1739 "benefice (n.): ecclesiastical living, church appointment"
[51]: {{page.q}}=883 "ambuscado (n.): ambush, ambuscade"
[52]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1: soon, shortly, presently"
[53]: {{page.q}}=18554 "health (n.) 1: toast, salutation in drink"
[54]: {{page.q}}=15753 "start (v.) 1: jump, recoil, flinch"
[55]: {{page.q}}=19973 "fright (v.), past form frighted: frighten, scare, terrify"
[56]: {{page.q}}=1335 "bake (v.): harden, make solid"
[57]: {{page.q}}=10222 "elf-lock (n.): hair treated by elves; matted locks"
[58]: {{page.q}}=18708 "hag (n.) 2: malicious sprite, wicked fairy"
[59]: {{page.q}}=19111 "learn (v.) 1: teach, instruct [not a regional dialect usage as in modern English]"


**ROMEO**

Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Thou talkest of nothing.



**MERCUTIO**

True. I talk of dreams;
Which are the children of an [idle][60] brain,
[Begot][61] of nothing but vain fantasy;
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
And more inconstant than the wind, who woos
Even now the frozen bosom of the North,
And, being angered, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping South.

[60]: {{page.q}}=5296 "idle (adj.) 4: foolish, superstitious, fanciful"
[61]: {{page.q}}=1602 "beget (v.), past form begot 2: produce, engender, give rise to"


**BENVOLIO**

This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.



**ROMEO**

I fear, too early. For my mind [misgive][62]s
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
Shall bitterly begin his [fearful][64] [date][63]
With this night's revels and [expire][65] the term
Of a despised life, closed in my breast,
By some vile forfeit of [untimely][66] death.
But He that hath the steerage of my course
Direct my sail! On, [lusty][67] gentlemen!

[62]: {{page.q}}=20994 "misgive (v.) 3: be uneasy about, feel apprehension about"
[63]: {{page.q}}=8807 "date (n.) 1: duration, period of existence"
[64]: {{page.q}}=19970 "fearful (adj.) 1: timid, timorous, frightened, full of fear"
[65]: {{page.q}}=10223 "expire (v.): end, conclude, terminate"
[66]: {{page.q}}=6719 "untimely (adv.) 1: prematurely, too soon, before due time"
[67]: {{page.q}}=19182 "lusty (adj.) 2: merry, cheerful, lively"


**BENVOLIO**

Strike, drum.



