---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act I - Scene V
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 13:52:26 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act1_scene5.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_They march about the stage; and Servingmen come_

_forth with napkins_

**FIRST SERVINGMAN**

Where's Potpan, that he helps not
to take away? He shift a [trencher][1]? He scrape a trencher!

[1]: {{page.q}}=5660 "trencher (n.): plate, platter, serving dish"


**SECOND SERVINGMAN**

When good manners shall lie all
in one or two men's hands, and they unwashed too, 'tis
a foul thing.



**FIRST SERVINGMAN**

Away with the [joint-stool][2]s; remove
the [court-cupboard][3]; look to the [plate][4]. Good thou, save
me a piece of [marchpane][5]; and, as thou loves me, let the
porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
_Exit Second Servingmen_
Anthony, and Potpan!
_Enter two more Servingmen_

[2]: {{page.q}}=18910 "joint-stool, join-stool, joined-stool (n.): well-made stool [by a joiner] [also used in phrases of ridicule]"
[3]: {{page.q}}=3773 "court-cupboard (n.): sideboard, cabinet"
[4]: {{page.q}}=13399 "plate (n.) 1: special tableware, household utensils of value"
[5]: {{page.q}}=11104 "marchpane (n.): marzipan"


**THIRD SERVINGMAN**

Ay, boy, ready.



**FIRST SERVINGMAN**

You are looked for and called for,
asked for and sought for, in the Great Chamber.



**FOURTH SERVINGMAN**

We cannot be here and there too.
[Cheerly][6], boys! Be brisk a while, and the longer liver
take all.
_Exeunt Third and Fourth Servingmen_
_Enter Capulet, his wife, Juliet, Tybalt, Nurse, and all_
_the guests and gentlewomen to the maskers_

[6]: {{page.q}}=4376 "cheerly (adv.) 2: [cry of encouragement] heartily, with a will"


**CAPULET**

Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes
Unplagued with corns will walk a [bout][7] with you.
Ah, my mistresses, which of you all
Will now [deny][9] to dance? She that makes [dainty][8],
She, I'll swear, hath corns. Am I [come][10] near ye now?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
That I have worn a [visor][11] and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
_Music plays, and they dance_
A hall, a hall! Give room! and foot it, girls.
More light, you [knave][12]s! and turn the tables up;
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Ah, sirrah, this [unlooked-for][14] [sport][13] comes well.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days.
How long is't now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?

[7]: {{page.q}}=2284 "bout (n.) 2: round, turn of the floor, division of a dance"
[8]: {{page.q}}=9306 "dainty (n.) 4: fastidious hesitation, prim response"
[9]: {{page.q}}=8882 "deny (v.) 2: refuse, decline, scorn"
[10]: {{page.q}}=3659 "come near (v.) 2: begin to understand, start to appreciate"
[11]: {{page.q}}=7384 "visor (n.): mask"
[12]: {{page.q}}=19028 "knave (n.) 2: servant, menial, lackey"
[13]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1: recreation, amusement, entertainment"
[14]: {{page.q}}=6973 "unlooked-for (adj.) 1: unexpected, unanticipated, unforeseen"


**COUSIN CAPULET**

By'r Lady, thirty years.



**CAPULET**

What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much.
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five-and-twenty years; and then we [mask][15]ed.

[15]: {{page.q}}=21229 "mask (v.): take part in a masque"


**COUSIN CAPULET**

'Tis more, 'tis more. His son is elder, sir.
His son is thirty.



**CAPULET**

Will you tell me that?
His son was but a [ward][16] two years ago.

[16]: {{page.q}}=7649 "ward (n.) 5: person under someone's protection, minor"


**ROMEO**

_(to Servingman)_
What lady's that, which doth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?



**SERVINGMAN**

I know not, sir.



**ROMEO**

O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
Like a rich jewel in an [Ethiop][17]'s ear –
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So [show][18]s a snowy dove [troop][19]ing with crows
As yonder lady o'er her [fellow][20]s shows.
The [measure][21] done, I'll watch her place of [stand][22]
And, touching hers, make blessed my [rude][23] hand.
Did my heart love till now? [Forswear][24] it, sight!
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.

[17]: {{page.q}}=9659 "Ethiop, Ethiope (adj./n.): Ethiopian, African, person with a dark countenance"
[18]: {{page.q}}=14157 "show (v.): appear, look [like], present [as]"
[19]: {{page.q}}=5988 "troop with (v.): go along with, be associated with, accompany"
[20]: {{page.q}}=20257 "fellow (n.) 1: companion, associate"
[21]: {{page.q}}=11029 "measure (n.) 8: slow stately dance, graceful movement"
[22]: {{page.q}}=15952 "stand (n.) 3: stop, pause, standing still"
[23]: {{page.q}}=16681 "rude (adj.) 7: amateurish, inexpert, lacking polish"
[24]: {{page.q}}=20685 "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 3: deny, repudiate, refuse to admit"


**TYBALT**

This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What, dares the slave
Come hither, covered with an [antic][25] face,
To [fleer][26] and [scorn][27] at our [solemnity][28]?
Now, by the [stock][29] and honour of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

[25]: {{page.q}}=869 "antic, antick(e), antique (adj.) 1: fantastic, bizarre, weird"
[26]: {{page.q}}=20661 "fleer (v.): jeer, grin scornfully, laugh mockingly"
[27]: {{page.q}}=16388 "scorn (v.) 1: mock, jeer, express disdain [at]"
[28]: {{page.q}}=14718 "solemnity (n.) 1: celebration, jubilation, festivity"
[29]: {{page.q}}=14337 "stock (n.) 1: tree, family-tree, ancestry"


**CAPULET**

Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?



**TYBALT**

Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe.
A villain, that is hither come in [spite][30]
To scorn at our solemnity this night.

[30]: {{page.q}}=15568 "spite (n.) 2: malice, ill-will, hatred"


**CAPULET**

Young Romeo is it?



**TYBALT**

'Tis he, that villain Romeo.



**CAPULET**

[Content][31] thee, [gentle][32] coz, let him alone.
'A bears him like a [portly][33] gentleman.
And, to say truth, Verona [brag][34]s of him
To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
Here in my house do him [disparagement][35].
Therefore be patient; take no note of him.
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An [ill-beseeming][36] [semblance][37] for a feast.

[31]: {{page.q}}=2912 "content (v.) 2: calm [down], settle, relax"
[32]: {{page.q}}=17496 "gentle (adj.) 2: courteous, friendly, kind"
[33]: {{page.q}}=12626 "portly (adj.): stately, majestic, dignified"
[34]: {{page.q}}=2253 "brag (v.): talk with pride [about], sound off [about]"
[35]: {{page.q}}=8665 "disparagement (n.): disgrace, dishonour, discredit"
[36]: {{page.q}}=5163 "ill-beseeming (adj.): unseemly, inappropriate, unbecoming"
[37]: {{page.q}}=14219 "semblance (n.) 1: appearance, outward show"


**TYBALT**

It [fit][38]s when such a villain is a guest.
I'll not endure him.

[38]: {{page.q}}=19838 "fit (v.) 1: suit, befit, be suitable [for]"


**CAPULET**

He shall be endured.
What, [goodman][39] boy! I say he shall. Go to!
Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul!
You'll make a [mutiny][40] among my guests!
You will set [cock-a-hoop][41]! You'll be the man!

[39]: {{page.q}}=17758 "goodman (adj.) 1: title for a person under the rank of gentleman, yeoman"
[40]: {{page.q}}=10602 "mutiny (n.) 1: riot, civil disturbance, state of discord"
[41]: {{page.q}}=3774 "cock-a-hoop, set: [unclear meaning] abandon all restraint, put everything into disorder"


**TYBALT**

Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.



**CAPULET**

Go to, go to!
You are a [saucy][42] boy. Is't so, indeed?
This trick may chance to [scath][43]e you. I know what.
You must [contrary][44] me! Marry, 'tis time –
Well [said][47], my [heart][45]s! – You are a [princox][46], go!
Be quiet, or – More light, more light! – For shame!
I'll make you quiet, what! – [Cheerly][48], my hearts!

[42]: {{page.q}}=14344 "saucy (adj.) 1: insolent, impudent, presumptuous, defiant"
[43]: {{page.q}}=16347 "scath, scathe (v.): hurt, harm, injure"
[44]: {{page.q}}=3775 "contrary (v.): contradict, gainsay, oppose"
[45]: {{page.q}}=18411 "heart (n.) 6: (plural) grand-hearted lads, fine companions"
[46]: {{page.q}}=13426 "princox (n.): conceited young fellow, impertinent youth"
[47]: {{page.q}}=15150 "said, well: well done"
[48]: {{page.q}}=4376 "cheerly (adv.) 2: [cry of encouragement] heartily, with a will"


**TYBALT**

Patience [perforce][50] with wilful [choler][49] meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw. But this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, [convert][51] to bitterest [gall][52].
_Exit Tybalt_

[49]: {{page.q}}=4301 "choler (n.): anger, rage, wrath"
[50]: {{page.q}}=12426 "perforce (adv.) 2: of necessity, with no choice in the matter"
[51]: {{page.q}}=2731 "convert (v.): change, transform, alter"
[52]: {{page.q}}=17559 "gall (n.) 2: bitterness, spitefulness, vindictiveness"


**ROMEO**

If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the [gentle][53] sin is this.
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

[53]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6: soft, tender, kind"


**JULIET**

Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which [mannerly][54] devotion shows in this.
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy [palmer][55]s' kiss.

[54]: {{page.q}}=11123 "mannerly (adj.) 2: seemly, decent, modest"
[55]: {{page.q}}=12615 "palmer (n.): pilgrim"


**ROMEO**

Have not saints lips, and holy [palmer][56]s too?

[56]: {{page.q}}=12615 "palmer (n.): pilgrim"


**JULIET**

Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.



**ROMEO**

O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
They pray: grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.



**JULIET**

Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.



**ROMEO**

Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
_He kisses her_
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purged.



**JULIET**

Then have my lips the sin that they have took.



**ROMEO**

Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly [urge][57]d!
Give me my sin again.
_He kisses her_

[57]: {{page.q}}=6699 "urge (v.) 5: state formally, present, propose"


**JULIET**

You kiss by th' book.



**NURSE**

Madam, your mother [crave][58]s a word with you.

[58]: {{page.q}}=2904 "crave (v.) 1: beg, entreat, request"


**ROMEO**

What is her mother?

**NURSE**

Marry, [bachelor][59],
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
I nursed her daughter that you talked withal.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the [chinks][60].

[59]: {{page.q}}=1741 "bachelor (n.) 2: young man"
[60]: {{page.q}}=4515 "chinks (n.): money-bags, ready money"


**ROMEO**

Is she a Capulet?
O [dear][62] [account][61]! My life is my foe's debt.

[61]: {{page.q}}=738 "account, accompt (n.) 1: reckoning, judgement [especially by God]"
[62]: {{page.q}}=8792 "dear (adj.) 1: dire, grievous, hard"


**BENVOLIO**

Away, be gone;. The [sport][64] is at the [best][63].

[63]: {{page.q}}=1121 "best (adj.) 2: at the highest point, in the best state"
[64]: {{page.q}}=14044 "sport (n.) 1: recreation, amusement, entertainment"


**ROMEO**

Ay, so I fear. The more is my [unrest][65].

[65]: {{page.q}}=7070 "unrest (n.): uneasiness, anxiety, apprehension"


**CAPULET**

Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone.
We have a trifling foolish [banquet][66] [towards][67].
_They whisper in his ear_
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
I thank you, [honest][68] gentlemen. Good night.
More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it [wax][69]es late.
I'll to my rest.
_Exeunt all but Juliet and Nurse_

[66]: {{page.q}}=1736 "banquet, banket (n.) 1: refreshments, light meal, dessert"
[67]: {{page.q}}=5585 "towards (adv.): at hand, approaching, imminent"
[68]: {{page.q}}=18190 "honest (adj.) 2: honourable, respectable, upright"
[69]: {{page.q}}=7560 "wax (v.) 1: grow, become, turn"


**JULIET**

Come hither, Nurse. What is yond gentleman?



**NURSE**

The son and heir of old Tiberio.



**JULIET**

What's he that now is going out of door?



**NURSE**

Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.



**JULIET**

What's he that follows here, that would not dance?



**NURSE**

I know not.



**JULIET**

Go ask his name. – If he be married,
My grave is [like][70] to be my wedding bed.

[70]: {{page.q}}=19137 "like (adv.) 1: likely, probable / probably"


**NURSE**

His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The only son of your great enemy.



**JULIET**

My only love, sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
[Prodigious][71] birth of love it is to me
That I must love a loathed enemy.

[71]: {{page.q}}=13120 "prodigious (adj.) 2: abnormal, monstrous, unnatural"


**NURSE**

What's this, what's this?



**JULIET**

A rhyme I learnt even now
Of one I danced withal.
_One calls within: ‘ Juliet ’_



**NURSE**

Anon, anon!
Come, let's away. The strangers all are gone.
_Exeunt_



