---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act I - Scene III
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 13:43:18 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act1_scene3.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse_

**LADY CAPULET**

Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.



**NURSE**

Now, by my [maidenhead][1] at twelve year old,
I bade her come. What, lamb! What, ladybird! –
God forbid! – Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
_Enter Juliet_

[1]: {{page.q}}=10517 "maidenhead (n.) 1: virginity"


**JULIET**

How now? who calls?



**NURSE**

Your mother.



**JULIET**

Madam, I am here. What is your will?



**LADY CAPULET**

This is the [matter][2] – Nurse, give leave awhile.
We must talk in secret. – Nurse, come back again.
I have [remember][3]ed me, [thou's][4] hear our counsel.
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.

[2]: {{page.q}}=10513 "matter (n.) 4: affair(s), business, real issue"
[3]: {{page.q}}=16705 "remember (v.) 2: recollect, recall, call to mind"
[4]: {{page.q}}=16420 "'s (pron.) 2: contracted form of ‘shall’"


**NURSE**

Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.



**LADY CAPULET**

She's not fourteen.



**NURSE**

I'll lay fourteen of my teeth –
And yet, to my [teen][5] be it spoken, I have but four –
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
To Lammastide?

[5]: {{page.q}}=5981 "teen (n.): trouble, grief, suffering"


**LADY CAPULET**

A fortnight and odd days.



**NURSE**

Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she – God rest all Christian souls! –
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God.
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
That shall she, marry! I remember it well.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
And she was weaned – I never shall forget it –
Of all the days of the year, upon that day.
For I had then laid [wormwood][7] to my [dug][6],
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it [tetchy][8] and fall out wi' th' dug!
Shake, [quoth][9] the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
To bid me [trudge][10].
And since that time it is eleven years.
For then she could stand [high-lone][11]. Nay, by th' rood,
She could have run and waddled all about.
For even the day before she [broke][12] her [brow][13].
And then my husband – God be with his soul!
'A was a merry man – took up the child.
‘ Yea,’ quoth he, ‘ dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more [wit][14].
Wilt thou not, Jule?’ And, by my holidam,
The pretty wretch left crying and said ‘ Ay.’
To see now how a jest shall [come][15] about!
I [warrant][16], an I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it. ‘ Wilt thou not, Jule?’ quoth he,
And, pretty fool, it [stint][17]ed and said ‘ Ay.’

[6]: {{page.q}}=8577 "dug (n.): nipple, teat, breast"
[7]: {{page.q}}=7603 "wormwood (n.) 1: absinthe plant, known for its bitter taste"
[8]: {{page.q}}=6213 "tetchy, teachy (adj.): irritable, peevish, fretful"
[9]: {{page.q}}=13725 "quoth (v.): said"
[10]: {{page.q}}=5573 "trudge (v.): go away, depart, leave"
[11]: {{page.q}}=18707 "high-lone (adv.): upright by oneself, without support"
[12]: {{page.q}}=1903 "break (v.) 11: graze, bruise, cut open"
[13]: {{page.q}}=2299 "brow (n.) 4: forehead [often plural, referring to the two prominences of the forehead]"
[14]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1: intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[15]: {{page.q}}=4728 "come about (v.) 1: turn out to be true, be fulfilled"
[16]: {{page.q}}=7550 "warrant (v.) 1: assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"
[17]: {{page.q}}=15972 "stint (v.) 1: cease, stop short"


**LADY CAPULET**

Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.



**NURSE**

Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
To think it should leave crying and say ‘ Ay.’
And yet, I warrant, it had upon it [brow][18]
A bump as big as a young cockerel's [stone][19],
A perilous knock. And it cried bitterly.
‘ Yea,’ quoth my husband, ‘ fallest upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age.
Wilt thou not, Jule?’ It stinted, and said ‘ Ay.’

[18]: {{page.q}}=2299 "brow (n.) 4: forehead [often plural, referring to the two prominences of the forehead]"
[19]: {{page.q}}=15973 "stone (n.) 4: testicle"


**JULIET**

And [stint][20] thou too, I pray thee, Nurse, say I.

[20]: {{page.q}}=15972 "stint (v.) 1: cease, stop short"


**NURSE**

Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed.
An I might live to see thee married [once][21],
I have my wish.

[21]: {{page.q}}=11969 "once (adv.) 3: one day, some time"


**LADY CAPULET**

Marry, that ‘ marry ’ is the very theme
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your [disposition][22]s to be married?

[22]: {{page.q}}=8440 "disposition (n.) 3: inclination, mood, frame of mind"


**JULIET**

It is an honour that I dream not of.



**NURSE**

An honour! Were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy teat.



**LADY CAPULET**

Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem
Are made already mothers. By my count,
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.



**NURSE**

A man, young lady! Lady, such a man
As all the world – why, he's a [man][23] of wax.

[23]: {{page.q}}=11100 "man of wax: faultless, perfect [as of a wax model]"


**LADY CAPULET**

Verona's summer hath not such a flower.



**NURSE**

Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a very flower.



**LADY CAPULET**

What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen.
Examine every [married][25] [lineament][24],
And see how one another lends [content][26].
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the [margent][27] of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story.
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him making yourself no less.

[24]: {{page.q}}=15354 "lineament (n.) 1: line, feature, characteristic, attribute"
[25]: {{page.q}}=11101 "married (adj.): joined in harmony, well-proportioned"
[26]: {{page.q}}=2803 "content (n.) 1: pleasure, satisfaction, happiness"
[27]: {{page.q}}=10404 "margent (n.) 1: margin [of a page, where an explanatory note would be found]"


**NURSE**

No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men.



**LADY CAPULET**

Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?



**JULIET**

I'll look to like, if looking liking move.
But no more deep will I [endart][28] mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
_Enter Servingman_

[28]: {{page.q}}=10220 "endart (v.): embed, bury, send in [as an arrow]"


**SERVANT**

Madam, the guests are come, supper served
up, you called, my young lady asked for, the Nurse
cursed in the pantry, and everything in extremity. I
must hence to [wait][30]. I beseech you follow [straight][29].

[29]: {{page.q}}=14086 "straight (adv.): straightaway, immediately, at once"
[30]: {{page.q}}=8131 "wait (v.): be in attendance, do service"


**LADY CAPULET**

We follow thee.
_Exit Servingman_
Juliet, the County stays.



**NURSE**

Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
_Exeunt_



