---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act I - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 13:36:04 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act1_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Sampson and Gregory, with swords and [bucklers][1], of the house of Capulet_

**SAMPSON**

Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry [coals][2].

[1]: {{page.q}}=1974 "buckler (n.): small round shield"
[2]: {{page.q}}=3769 "coals, carry: submit to insult, show cowardice; also: do degrading work"


**GREGORY**

No. For then we should be [collier][3]s.

[3]: {{page.q}}=3660 "collier (n.): coalman, coal-vendor"


**SAMPSON**

I mean, an we be in [choler][4], we'll [draw][5].

[4]: {{page.q}}=4301 "choler (n.): anger, rage, wrath"
[5]: {{page.q}}=8910 "draw (v.) 10: draw a sword"


**GREGORY**

Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of [collar][6].

[6]: {{page.q}}=3770 "collar, colour (n.): noose, hangman's halter"


**SAMPSON**

I strike quickly, being [move][7]d.

[7]: {{page.q}}=10634 "move (v.) 2: move to anger, provoke, exasperate"


**GREGORY**

But thou art not quickly moved to strike.



**SAMPSON**

A dog of the house of Montague moves me.



**GREGORY**

To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.
Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runnest away.



**SAMPSON**

A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I
will take the [wall][8] of any man or maid of Montague's.

[8]: {{page.q}}=5795 "wall, take the: take the inside position, keep to the cleaner side of a path"


**GREGORY**

That shows thee a weak slave. For the weakest
goes to the wall.



**SAMPSON**

'Tis true; and therefore women, being the
weaker [vessel][9]s, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I
will push Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his
maids to the wall.

[9]: {{page.q}}=7363 "vessel (n.): body, frame"


**GREGORY**

The quarrel is between our masters and us
their men.



**SAMPSON**

'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When
I have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the
maids – I will cut off their heads.



**GREGORY**

The heads of the maids?



**SAMPSON**

Ay, the heads of the maids, or their [maidenhead][10]s.
Take it in what sense thou wilt.

[10]: {{page.q}}=10517 "maidenhead (n.) 1: virginity"


**GREGORY**

They must take it in sense that feel it.



**SAMPSON**

Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and
'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.



**GREGORY**

'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
hadst been [poor John][11]. Draw thy [tool][12]. Here comes of
the house of Montagues.
_Enter Abram and another Servingman_

[11]: {{page.q}}=12979 "poor-John (n.): salted hake, dried fish"
[12]: {{page.q}}=6069 "tool (n.) 1: weapon, sword"


**SAMPSON**

My naked weapon is out. Quarrel. I will back
thee.



**GREGORY**

How? Turn thy back and run?



**SAMPSON**

Fear me not.



**GREGORY**

No, marry. I fear thee!



**SAMPSON**

Let us take the law of our sides. Let them
begin.



**GREGORY**

I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as
they [list][13].

[13]: {{page.q}}=19149 "list (v.) 1: wish, like, please"


**SAMPSON**

Nay, as they dare. I will [bite][14] my thumb at them;
which is disgrace to them if they bear it.

[14]: {{page.q}}=1738 "bite one's thumb: [gesture of insult or defiance] insert the thumb nail into the mouth, making it click againt the upper teeth upon release"


**ABRAM**

Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?



**SAMPSON**

I do bite my thumb, sir.



**ABRAM**

Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?



**SAMPSON**

_(aside to Gregory)_
Is the law of our side, if I say
‘ Ay ’?



**GREGORY**

_(aside to Sampson)_
No.



**SAMPSON**

No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir. But
I bite my thumb, sir.



**GREGORY**

Do you quarrel, sir?



**ABRAM**

Quarrel, sir? No, sir.



**SAMPSON**

If you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as good
a man as you.



**ABRAM**

No better.



**SAMPSON**

Well, sir.
_Enter Benvolio_



**GREGORY**

_(aside to Sampson)_
Say ‘ better.’ Here comes one
of my master's kinsmen.



**SAMPSON**

Yes, better, sir.



**ABRAM**

You lie.



**SAMPSON**

Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy
[washing][15] blow.
_They fight_

[15]: {{page.q}}=5796 "washing (adj.): swashing, slashing"


**BENVOLIO**

Part, fools!
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
_Enter Tybalt_



**TYBALT**

What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.



**BENVOLIO**

I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.



**TYBALT**

What, [drawn][16], and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Have at thee, coward!
_They fight_
_Enter three or four Citizens with clubs or partisans_

[16]: {{page.q}}=8855 "drawn (adj.) 1: with sword drawn"


**CITIZENS**

Clubs, bills, and [partisan][17]s! Strike! Beat them
down! Down with the Capulets! Down with the
Montagues!
_Enter old Capulet in his gown, and his wife_

[17]: {{page.q}}=12153 "partisan (n.): weapon with a long handle and a broad head, sometimes with a projection at the side"


**CAPULET**

What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!



**LADY CAPULET**

A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
_Enter old Montague and his wife_



**CAPULET**

My sword, I say! Old Montague is come
And flourishes his blade in [spite][18] of me.

[18]: {{page.q}}=15568 "spite (n.) 2: malice, ill-will, hatred"


**MONTAGUE**

Thou villain Capulet! – Hold me not. Let me go.



**LADY MONTAGUE**

Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
_Enter Prince Escalus, with his train_



**PRINCE**

Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel, –
Will they not hear? What, ho – you men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With [purple][19] fountains issuing from your veins!
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your [mistempered][20] weapons to the ground
And hear the sentence of your [moved][21] prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets
And made Verona's [ancient][22] citizens
[Cast][23] by their [grave-beseeming][24] [ornament][25]s
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
[Cankered][27] with peace, to part your cankered hate.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgement-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
_Exeunt all but Montague, his wife, and Benvolio_

[19]: {{page.q}}=13192 "purple (adj.): bright-red, blood-coloured, bloody"
[20]: {{page.q}}=11097 "mistempered (adj.) 2: tempered for wickedness, made with evil intent"
[21]: {{page.q}}=11098 "moved (adj.) 2: aroused, provoked, exasperated"
[22]: {{page.q}}=419 "ancient, aunchient (adj.) 4: aged, very old, venerable"
[23]: {{page.q}}=4246 "cast by (v.): throw aside, put to one side"
[24]: {{page.q}}=18043 "grave-beseeming (adj.): suitably dignified, sober-looking"
[25]: {{page.q}}=11705 "ornament (n.) 2: (plural) robes, garments, attire"
[26]: {{page.q}}=3844 "cankered (adj.) 3: malignant, malicious, bad-tempered"
[27]: {{page.q}}=4066 "cankered (adj.) 1: rusted, corroded, tarnished"


**MONTAGUE**

Who set this [ancient][29] quarrel new [abroach][28]?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

[28]: {{page.q}}=878 "abroach (adv.): afoot, astir, in motion"
[29]: {{page.q}}=225 "ancient, aunchient (adj.) 1: long-established, long-standing"


**BENVOLIO**

Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours, [close][30] fighting ere I did approach.
I drew to part them. In the instant came
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared;
Which, as he [breathe][31]d defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Came more and more, and fought on [part][32] and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

[30]: {{page.q}}=3427 "close (adv.) 5: close together"
[31]: {{page.q}}=1807 "breathe (v.) 1: speak, utter, talk"
[32]: {{page.q}}=13297 "part (n.) 2: side, camp, party"


**LADY MONTAGUE**

O where is Romeo? Saw you him today?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.



**BENVOLIO**

Madam, an hour before the worshipped sun
Peered forth the golden window of the East,
A troubled mind drive me to walk abroad;
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward [root][33]eth from this city side,
So early walking did I see your son.
Towards him I made. But he was [ware][34] of me
And stole into the [covert][35] of the wood.
I, measuring his [affection][36]s by my own,
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
Being one to many by my weary self,
Pursued my [humour][37], not pursuing his,
And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.

[33]: {{page.q}}=17309 "root (v.) 2: grow, be established, flourish"
[34]: {{page.q}}=7546 "ware (adj.) 1: aware, conscious, sensible"
[35]: {{page.q}}=3479 "covert (n.): shelter, hiding-place, concealed spot"
[36]: {{page.q}}=98 "affection (n.) 1: fancy, inclination, desire"
[37]: {{page.q}}=18215 "humour (n.) 2: fancy, whim, inclination, caprice"


**MONTAGUE**

Many a morning hath he there been seen
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs.
But all so soon as the [all-cheering][38] sun
Should in the farthest East begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Away from light steals home my [heavy][39] son
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out
And makes himself an artificial night.
Black and portentous must this [humour][40] prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

[38]: {{page.q}}=1236 "all-cheering (adj.): invigorating everything"
[39]: {{page.q}}=18220 "heavy (adj.) 1: sorrowful, sad, gloomy"
[40]: {{page.q}}=18215 "humour (n.) 2: fancy, whim, inclination, caprice"


**BENVOLIO**

My noble uncle, do you know the cause?



**MONTAGUE**

I neither know it nor can learn of him.



**BENVOLIO**

Have you [importune][41]d him by any means?

[41]: {{page.q}}=4833 "importune (v.) 1: urge, press"


**MONTAGUE**

Both by myself and many other friends.
But he, his own [affection][42]s' counsellor,
Is to himself – I will not say how true –
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from [sounding][43] and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an [envious][44] worm
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure as know.
_Enter Romeo_

[42]: {{page.q}}=11 "affection (n.) 2: emotion, feeling"
[43]: {{page.q}}=16004 "sounding (n.) 2: sounding out, gauging depth, investigation"
[44]: {{page.q}}=9645 "envious (adj.): malicious, spiteful, vindictive, full of enmity"


**BENVOLIO**

See, where he comes. So please you step aside.
I'll know his [grievance][46], or be much [denied][45].

[45]: {{page.q}}=8536 "deny (v.) 1: refuse, rebuff, reject"
[46]: {{page.q}}=17862 "grievance (n.) 2: cause of annoyance, painful constraint, source of sorrow"


**MONTAGUE**

I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
To hear true [shrift][47]. Come, madam, let's away.
_Exeunt Montague and wife_

[47]: {{page.q}}=15983 "shrift (n.) 1: confession"


**BENVOLIO**

Good [morrow][48], cousin.

[48]: {{page.q}}=10890 "morrow (n.): morning"


**ROMEO**

Is the day so young?



**BENVOLIO**

But [new][49] struck nine.

[49]: {{page.q}}=11292 "new (adv.) 1: newly, freshly, recently, just"


**ROMEO**

Ay me! [sad][50] hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?

[50]: {{page.q}}=15557 "sad (adj.) 3: downcast, distressed, mournful, gloomy"


**BENVOLIO**

It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?



**ROMEO**

Not having that which having makes them short.



**BENVOLIO**

In love?



**ROMEO**

Out –



**BENVOLIO**

Of love?



**ROMEO**

Out of her favour where I am in love.



**BENVOLIO**

Alas that love, so [gentle][51] in his view,
Should be so [tyrannous][53] and rough in [proof][52]!

[51]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6: soft, tender, kind"
[52]: {{page.q}}=12271 "proof (n.) 2: experience, actual practice, tried knowledge"
[53]: {{page.q}}=5511 "tyrannous (adj.): cruel, pitiless, oppressive"


**ROMEO**

Alas that love, whose view is [muffled][54], [still][55]
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine? O me, what fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here's much to-do with hate, but more with love.
Why then, O [brawling][56] love, O loving hate,
[O][59] anything, of nothing first create!
O [heavy][58] lightness, serious [vanity][60],
Misshapen chaos of [well-seeming][61] forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?

[54]: {{page.q}}=10999 "muffled (adj.): blindfolded, covered up"
[55]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1: constantly, always, continually"
[56]: {{page.q}}=2270 "brawling (adj.): clamorous, noisy, tumultuous"
[57]: {{page.q}}=18156 "heavy (adj.) 2: grave, serious, weighty"
[58]: {{page.q}}=18220 "heavy (adj.) 1: sorrowful, sad, gloomy"
[59]: {{page.q}}=12115 "O (int.) 1: vocalization used before a direct address [to a person, thing, concept, etc]"
[60]: {{page.q}}=7447 "vanity (n.) 1: worthlessness, futility, unprofitable way of life"
[61]: {{page.q}}=8033 "well-seeming (adj.): attractively looking, presenting a plausible appearance"


**BENVOLIO**

No, coz, I rather weep.



**ROMEO**

Good [heart][62], at what?

[62]: {{page.q}}=18709 "heart (n.) 5: [term of endearment] dear friend"


**BENVOLIO**

At thy good heart's oppression.



**ROMEO**

Why, such is love's transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it pressed
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs;
Being [purge][63]d, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being vexed, a sea nourished with lovers' tears.
What is it else? A madness most [discreet][64],
A choking [gall][65] and a preserving [sweet][66].
Farewell, my coz.

[63]: {{page.q}}=12523 "purge (v.) 1: cleanse, purify, get rid of impurities [in]"
[64]: {{page.q}}=8692 "discreet (adj.): discerning, judicious, prudent"
[65]: {{page.q}}=17559 "gall (n.) 2: bitterness, spitefulness, vindictiveness"
[66]: {{page.q}}=15968 "sweet (n.) 1: sweetness, pleasure, delight"
[67]: {{page.q}}=14713 "soft (adv.) 1: [used as a command] not so fast, wait a moment"


**BENVOLIO**

[Soft][67]! I will go along.
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.



**ROMEO**

Tut, I have lost myself. I am not here.
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.



**BENVOLIO**

Tell me in [sadness][68], who is that you love.

[68]: {{page.q}}=16309 "sadness, in / in good: in earnest, seriously"


**ROMEO**

What, shall I groan and tell thee?



**BENVOLIO**

Groan! Why, no.
But [sadly][69] tell me who.

[69]: {{page.q}}=13907 "sadly (adv.) 1: seriously, gravely, solemnly"


**ROMEO**

Bid a sick man in sadness make his will.
Ah, word [ill][71] urged to one that is so ill!
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

[70]: {{page.q}}=5031 "ill (adj.) 4: sick, indisposed, unwell"
[71]: {{page.q}}=4953 "ill (adv.) 1: badly, adversely, unfavourably"


**BENVOLIO**

I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.



**ROMEO**

A right good [markman][72]! And she's fair I love.

[72]: {{page.q}}=11122 "markman (n.): marksman"


**BENVOLIO**

A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.



**ROMEO**

Well, in that [hit][73] you miss. She'll not be hit
[Wit][74]h Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
And, in strong [proof][75] of chastity well armed,
From love's weak childish bow she lives uncharmed.
She will not [stay][76] the siege of loving [term][77]s,
Nor [bide][79] th' encounter of [assailing][78] eyes,
Nor [ope][80] her lap to saint-seducing gold.
O, she is rich in beauty; only poor
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.

[73]: {{page.q}}=18721 "hit (n.): shot, stroke"
[74]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1: intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[75]: {{page.q}}=12270 "proof (n.) 1: tested strength, proven power of resistance, impenetrability"
[76]: {{page.q}}=15951 "stay (v.) 14: put up with, endure, abide"
[77]: {{page.q}}=6232 "term (n.) 1: word, expression, utterance"
[78]: {{page.q}}=1271 "assailing  (adj.): wooing, loving, amorous"
[79]: {{page.q}}=2064 "bide (v.) 1: endure, suffer, undergo"
[80]: {{page.q}}=11610 "ope (v.): open"


**BENVOLIO**

Then she hath sworn that she will [still][82] live [chaste][81]?

[81]: {{page.q}}=4683 "chaste (adj.) 1: celibate, single, unmarried"
[82]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1: constantly, always, continually"


**ROMEO**

She hath; and in that [sparing][83] makes huge waste.
For beauty, [starve][84]d with her severity,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She hath [forsworn][85] to love; and in that vow
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.

[83]: {{page.q}}=15969 "sparing (n.): economy, thrift, saving"
[84]: {{page.q}}=16005 "starve (v.) 2: bring to death, kill off"
[85]: {{page.q}}=19977 "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 2: abandon, renounce, reject, give up"


**BENVOLIO**

Be ruled by me – forget to think of her.



**ROMEO**

O, teach me how I should forget to think!



**BENVOLIO**

By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
Examine other beauties.



**ROMEO**

'Tis the way
To call hers, exquisite, in [question][86] more.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' [brow][87]s,
Being black, put us in mind they hide the fair.
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Show me a mistress that is [passing][88] fair,
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Where I may read who [pass][89]ed that passing fair?
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.

[86]: {{page.q}}=13831 "question (n.) 3: consideration, contention"
[87]: {{page.q}}=2299 "brow (n.) 4: forehead [often plural, referring to the two prominences of the forehead]"
[88]: {{page.q}}=12159 "passing (adv.): very, exceedingly, extremely"
[89]: {{page.q}}=12157 "pass (v.) 1: surpass, go beyond, outdo"


**BENVOLIO**

I'll pay that [doctrine][90], or else die in debt.
_Exeunt_

[90]: {{page.q}}=9584 "doctrine (n.) 2: precept, lesson"


