---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act II - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 13:54:34 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act2_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Romeo alone_

**ROMEO**

Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy [centre][1] out.
_Enter Benvolio with Mercutio. Romeo withdraws_

[1]: {{page.q}}=4192 "centre (n.) 3: core of being, heart, soul"


**BENVOLIO**

Romeo! My cousin Romeo! Romeo!



**MERCUTIO**

He is wise,
And, on my life, hath stolen him home to bed.



**BENVOLIO**

He ran this way and leapt this [orchard][2] wall.
Call, good Mercutio.

[2]: {{page.q}}=11618 "orchard (n.): garden"


**MERCUTIO**

Nay, I'll [conjure][3] too.
Romeo! [Humour][4]s! Madman! Passion! Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh.
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied.
Cry but ‘ Ay me!’ Pronounce but ‘ love ’ and ‘ dove.’
Speak to my [gossip][5] Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her [purblind][6] son and heir,
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so [trim][7]
When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the [demesne][8]s that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!

[3]: {{page.q}}=2996 "conjure (v.) 4: engage in magic, cast spells, invoke supernatural aid"
[4]: {{page.q}}=18215 "humour (n.) 2: fancy, whim, inclination, caprice"
[5]: {{page.q}}=17737 "gossip (n.) 2: friend, neighbour"
[6]: {{page.q}}=12936 "purblind (adj.) 2: blind"
[7]: {{page.q}}=6441 "trim (adv.): well, effectively, finely"
[8]: {{page.q}}=8918 "demesne (n.): (plural) territories, lands, dominions"


**BENVOLIO**

An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.



**MERCUTIO**

This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' [circle][9]
Of some [strange][10] nature, letting it there stand
Till she had [laid][12] it and [conjure][11]d it down.
That were some [spite][13]. My invocation
Is fair and honest. In his mistress' name
I conjure only but to raise up him.

[9]: {{page.q}}=3776 "circle (n.) 2: magical circle"
[10]: {{page.q}}=15975 "strange (adj.) 6: of another person, not one's own"
[11]: {{page.q}}=2938 "conjure (v.) 3: control, constrain [by invoking divine powers]"
[12]: {{page.q}}=19631 "lay (v.) 10: appease, prevent from walking"
[13]: {{page.q}}=14578 "spite (n.) 1: annoyance, vexation, irritation"


**BENVOLIO**

Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
To be [consort][14]ed with the [humorous][15] night.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.

[14]: {{page.q}}=2986 "consort (v.): accompany, attend, go with"
[15]: {{page.q}}=18710 "humorous (adj.) 2: humid, damp, moist"


**MERCUTIO**

If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a [medlar][16] tree
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
An [open-arse][17] and thou a [poppering][18] pear!
Romeo, good night. I'll to my [truckle-bed][19].
This [field-bed][20] is too cold for me to sleep.
Come, shall we go?

[16]: {{page.q}}=11105 "medlar (adj.): variety of tree [whose fruit were thought to resemble female genitalia]"
[17]: {{page.q}}=12012 "open-arse (n.): [rustic bawdy, from the shape of the fruit] medlar fruit"
[18]: {{page.q}}=13427 "poppering / poperin (adj.): variety of pear [from Poperinghe, Belgium]"
[19]: {{page.q}}=5964 "truckle-bed (n.): low-lying bed on castors, trundle-bed"
[20]: {{page.q}}=20596 "field-bed (n.): bed out in the open, bed on the ground"


**BENVOLIO**

Go then, for 'tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.
_Exeunt Benvolio and Mercutio_



