---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act II - Scene III
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 13:58:55 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act2_scene3.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Friar Laurence alone, with a basket_

**FRIAR**

Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
I must up-fill this [osier][2] [cage][1] of ours
With [baleful][3] weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
What is her burying grave, that is her womb;
And from her womb children of [divers][4] kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
Many for many [virtue][5]s excellent,
None but for some, and yet all different.
O [mickle][7] is the powerful [grace][6] that lies
In plants, herbs, stones, and their [true][9] [qualities][8].
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
But to the earth some special good doth give;
Nor [aught][10] so good but, [strain][12]ed from that [fair][11] use,
Revolts from true [birth][13], stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself [turn][14]s vice, being misapplied,
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
Within the infant rind of this weak flower
Poison hath residence, and [medicine][15] power.
For this, being smelt, with that [part][16] cheers each part;
Being tasted, [stays][17] all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings [encamp][18] them [still][19]
In man as well as herbs – grace and [rude][20] [will][21].
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the [canker][22] death eats up that plant.
_Enter Romeo_

[1]: {{page.q}}=4067 "cage (n.) 1: basket, frame"
[2]: {{page.q}}=12017 "osier (adj.): made of willow"
[3]: {{page.q}}=1313 "baleful (adj.): deadly, mortal, malignant"
[4]: {{page.q}}=9213 "divers (adj.): different, various, several"
[5]: {{page.q}}=7225 "virtue (n.) 4: power, capability, efficacy, property"
[6]: {{page.q}}=17515 "grace (n.) 2: virtue, good quality"
[7]: {{page.q}}=10531 "mickle (adj.): great, much, large"
[8]: {{page.q}}=13816 "quality (n.) 5: characteristic, feature, property"
[9]: {{page.q}}=6427 "true (adj.) 7: inherent, authentic, genuine"
[10]: {{page.q}}=84 "aught (n.): anything, [with negative word] nothing"
[11]: {{page.q}}=20510 "fair (adj.) 10: legitimate, lawful, proper"
[12]: {{page.q}}=16103 "strain (v.) 2: constrain, force, press"
[13]: {{page.q}}=1131 "birth (n.) 2: nature, kind, natural character"
[14]: {{page.q}}=5415 "turn (v.) 2: become, transform, change [into]"
[15]: {{page.q}}=11106 "medicine (n.) 1: healing, effective remedy"
[16]: {{page.q}}=12150 "part (n.) 1: quality, attribute, gift, accomplishment [of mind or body]"
[17]: {{page.q}}=15545 "stay (v.) 8: stop, prevent, end"
[18]: {{page.q}}=10224 "encamp (v.): form into a camp, settle in a camp"
[19]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1: constantly, always, continually"
[20]: {{page.q}}=17312 "rude (adj.) 9: uncontrolled, unruly, of the flesh"
[21]: {{page.q}}=7575 "will (n.) 2: lust, sexual desire, passion"
[22]: {{page.q}}=3924 "canker (n./adj.) 1: grub that destroys plant buds and leaves, cankerworm, parasite"


**ROMEO**

Good morrow, father.



**FRIAR**

Benedicite!
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it [argue][23]s a [distempered][24] head
So soon to bid good [morrow][25] to thy bed.
Care [keep][26]s his [watch][27] in every old man's eye,
And where care lodges, sleep will never lie.
But where [unbruised][28] youth with [unstuffed][29] brain
Doth [couch][30] his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art [uprouse][32]d with some [distemperature][31].
Or if not so, then here I hit it right –,
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.

[23]: {{page.q}}=870 "argue (v.) 1: indicate, betoken, be evidence of"
[24]: {{page.q}}=9188 "distempered (adj.) 3: disordered, disturbed, diseased"
[25]: {{page.q}}=10890 "morrow (n.): morning"
[26]: {{page.q}}=19037 "keep (v.) 4: keep up, maintain, carry on"
[27]: {{page.q}}=7556 "watch (n.) 3: sleepless state, wakefulness"
[28]: {{page.q}}=7071 "unbruised (adj.) 2: undamaged by the world"
[29]: {{page.q}}=7072 "unstuffed (adj.): unclogged by troubles"
[30]: {{page.q}}=3784 "couch (v.) 5: lay down, rest, repose"
[31]: {{page.q}}=8772 "distemperature (n.) 1: ailment, disorder, malady"
[32]: {{page.q}}=7073 "uprouse (v.): arouse, get up, leave one's bed"


**ROMEO**

That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.



**FRIAR**

God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?



**ROMEO**

With Rosaline, my [ghostly][33] father? No.
I have forgot that name and that name's woe.

[33]: {{page.q}}=17917 "ghostly (adj.): spiritual, holy"


**FRIAR**

That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?



**ROMEO**

I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a [sudden][34] one hath wounded me
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thy help and holy [physic][35] lies.
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
My [intercession][36] likewise [stead][37]s my foe.

[34]: {{page.q}}=15881 "sudden, of / on / upon a / the 1: suddenly"
[35]: {{page.q}}=12190 "physic (n.) 1: medicine, healing, treatment"
[36]: {{page.q}}=4904 "intercession (n.) 1: prayer, plea, entreaty"
[37]: {{page.q}}=14127 "stead (v.): help, assist, benefit"


**FRIAR**

Be plain, good son, and [homely][39] in thy [drift][38].
Riddling confession finds but riddling [shrift][40].

[38]: {{page.q}}=8478 "drift (n.) 1: plan, intention, aim"
[39]: {{page.q}}=18461 "homely (adj.) 1: plain, simple, ordinary"
[40]: {{page.q}}=15555 "shrift (n.) 2: absolution"


**ROMEO**

Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And all [combine][41]d, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
We met, we wooed and made exchange of vow,
I'll tell thee as we pass. But this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us today.

[41]: {{page.q}}=3785 "combine (v.) 2: unite in harmony, be at one"


**FRIAR**

Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria! What a deal of [brine][42]
Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste
To [season][43] love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears.
Thy old groans yet ring in mine ancient ears.
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
And art thou changed? Pronounce this [sentence][44] then:
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.

[42]: {{page.q}}=1858 "brine (n.) 1: salt water [i.e. tears]"
[43]: {{page.q}}=15757 "season (v.) 8: preserve, keep"
[44]: {{page.q}}=15739 "sentence (n.) 1: maxim, wise saying, precept"


**ROMEO**

Thou [chidst][45] me [oft][46] for loving Rosaline.

[45]: {{page.q}}=4299 "chide (v.), past form chid 1: scold, rebuke, reprove"
[46]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.): often"


**FRIAR**

For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.



**ROMEO**

And [badest][47] me bury love.

[47]: {{page.q}}=2077 "bid (v.), past form bade 3: pray, entreat, beg, ask"


**FRIAR**

Not in a grave
To lay one in, another out to have.



**ROMEO**

I pray thee [chide][48] me not. Her whom I love now
Doth [grace][49] for grace and love for love allow.
The other did not so.

[48]: {{page.q}}=4299 "chide (v.), past form chid 1: scold, rebuke, reprove"
[49]: {{page.q}}=17514 "grace (n.) 1: honour, favour, recognition, respect"


**FRIAR**

O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me.
In one respect I'll thy assistant be.
For this [alliance][50] may so happy prove
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.

[50]: {{page.q}}=1242 "alliance (n.) 2: marriage"


**ROMEO**

O, let us hence! I [stand][51] on sudden haste.

[51]: {{page.q}}=14532 "stand on (v.) 1: insist on, demand, call for"


**FRIAR**

Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast.
_Exeunt_



