---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act II - Scene VI
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 14:13:04 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act2_scene6.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Friar Laurence and Romeo_

**FRIAR**

So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
That [after-hours][1] with sorrow [chide][2] us not!

[1]: {{page.q}}=528 "after-hours (n.): subsequent time, later moments"
[2]: {{page.q}}=4299 "chide (v.), past form chid 1: scold, rebuke, reprove"


**ROMEO**

Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can,
It cannot [countervail][3] the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but [close][4] our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare –
It is enough I may but call her mine.

[3]: {{page.q}}=3518 "countervail (v.): counterbalance, match, be equal to"
[4]: {{page.q}}=4716 "close (v.) 6: join, clasp"


**FRIAR**

These violent delights have violent ends
And in their [triumph][6] die, like fire and [powder][5],
Which as they kiss consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And in the taste [confound][7]s the appetite.
Therefore love moderately. Long love doth so.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
_Enter Juliet somewhat fast. She embraces Romeo_
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
A lover may bestride the [gossamer][8]s
That idles in the [wanton][9] summer air,
And yet not fall. So [light][10] is [vanity][11].

[5]: {{page.q}}=13447 "powder (n.): gunpowder"
[6]: {{page.q}}=6442 "triumph (n.) 4: high point, joy of the moment"
[7]: {{page.q}}=2854 "confound (v.) 1: destroy, overthrow, ruin"
[8]: {{page.q}}=18047 "gossamer (n.): fine thread of a spider's web"
[9]: {{page.q}}=8273 "wanton (adj.) 2: casual, gentle"
[10]: {{page.q}}=19410 "light (adj.) 5: [of counterfeit coins] of less weight, worthless, cheap"
[11]: {{page.q}}=7447 "vanity (n.) 1: worthlessness, futility, unprofitable way of life"


**JULIET**

Good [even][12] to my [ghostly][13] confessor.

[12]: {{page.q}}=10092 "even (n.) 1: evening"
[13]: {{page.q}}=17917 "ghostly (adj.): spiritual, holy"


**FRIAR**

Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.



**JULIET**

As much to him, else is his thanks too much.



**ROMEO**

Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more
To [blazon][14] it, then sweeten with thy [breath][15]
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.

[14]: {{page.q}}=2111 "blazon (v.): proclaim, display [as in a coat of arms]"
[15]: {{page.q}}=1064 "breath (n.) 1: utterance, speech, voice"


**JULIET**

[Conceit][16], more rich in [matter][17] than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
They are but beggars that can count their [worth][18].
But my true love is grown to such excess
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

[16]: {{page.q}}=2694 "conceit (n.) 1: imagination, fancy, wit"
[17]: {{page.q}}=10417 "matter (n.) 1: subject-matter, content, substance"
[18]: {{page.q}}=8087 "worth (n.) 2: means, resources, wherewithal"


**FRIAR**

Come, come with me, and we will make short work.
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till Holy Church [incorporate][19] two in one.
_Exeunt_

[19]: {{page.q}}=5354 "incorporate (v.): make one body [of], unite"


