---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act II - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 13:55:56 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act2_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

**ROMEO**

_(coming forward)_
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
_Enter Juliet above_
But, soft! What light through yonder window breaks?
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
Arise, fair sun, and kill the [envious][1] moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid, since she is [envious][2].
Her [vestal][5] [livery][3] is but [sick][4] and green,
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
It is my lady, O, it is my love!
O that she knew she were!
She speaks. Yet she says nothing. What of that?
Her eye discourses. I will answer it.
I am too bold. 'Tis not to me she speaks.
Two of the fairest [star][6]s in all the heaven,
Having some [business][7], do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their [sphere][8]s till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
As daylight doth a lamp. Her eyes in heaven
Would through the airy [region][9] stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!

[1]: {{page.q}}=9645 "envious (adj.): malicious, spiteful, vindictive, full of enmity"
[2]: {{page.q}}=9645 "envious (adj.): malicious, spiteful, vindictive, full of enmity"
[3]: {{page.q}}=19153 "livery (n.) 1: uniform, costume, special clothing"
[4]: {{page.q}}=16435 "sick (adj.) 7: pale, wan, of a sickly hue"
[5]: {{page.q}}=7458 "vestal (adj.) 2: virgin"
[6]: {{page.q}}=15976 "star (n.) 1: planet"
[7]: {{page.q}}=2143 "business (n.) 2: mission, errand, purpose"
[8]: {{page.q}}=15747 "sphere (n.) 1: celestial globe in which a heavenly body was thought to move, orbit"
[9]: {{page.q}}=16596 "region (n.) 1: sky, air, heavens"


**JULIET**

Ay me!



**ROMEO**

She speaks.
O, speak again, bright angel! – for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy, [puffing][10] clouds
And sails upon the [bosom][11] of the air.

[10]: {{page.q}}=13445 "puffing (adj.): puffed-out, swollen, swelling"
[11]: {{page.q}}=2363 "bosom (n.) 6: surface"


**JULIET**

O Romeo, Romeo! – wherefore art thou Romeo?
[Deny][12] thy father and [refuse][13] thy name.
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

[12]: {{page.q}}=8652 "deny (v.) 4: disown, disavow, renounce"
[13]: {{page.q}}=17212 "refuse (v.): spurn, disown, cast off"


**ROMEO**

_(aside)_
Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?



**JULIET**

'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What's Montague? It is nor hand nor foot
Nor arm nor face nor any other part
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other word would smell as sweet.
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,
Retain that dear perfection which he [owe][14]s
Without that title. Romeo, [doff][15] thy name;
And for thy name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.

[14]: {{page.q}}=11935 "owe (v.) 1: own, possess, have"
[15]: {{page.q}}=8957 "doff (v.): throw off, get rid of, do away with"


**ROMEO**

I take thee at thy word.
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized.
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.



**JULIET**

What man art thou that, thus [bescreen][16]ed in night,
So stumblest on my [counsel][17]?

[16]: {{page.q}}=1742 "bescreen (v.): hide from sight, cover up"
[17]: {{page.q}}=3777 "counsel (n.) 8: private reflection, self-communing"


**ROMEO**

By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
My name, dear saint, is [hateful][18] to myself,
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

[18]: {{page.q}}=18742 "hateful (adj.) 2: repulsive, obnoxious, incompatible [with]"


**JULIET**

My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongue's uttering, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?



**ROMEO**

Neither, fair saint, if either thee [dislike][19].

[19]: {{page.q}}=9053 "dislike (v.) 1: upset, displease, offend"


**JULIET**

How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The [orchard][20] walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

[20]: {{page.q}}=11618 "orchard (n.): garden"


**ROMEO**

With love's light wings did I [o'erperch][21] these walls.
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.

[21]: {{page.q}}=12013 "overperch (v.): fly over, surmount"


**JULIET**

If they do see thee, they will murder thee.



**ROMEO**

Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.



**JULIET**

I would not for the world they saw thee here.



**ROMEO**

I have night's cloak to hide me from their eyes.
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
My life were better ended by their hate
Than death [prorogue][23]d, [wanting][22] of thy love.

[22]: {{page.q}}=7539 "want (v.) 1: lack, need, be without"
[23]: {{page.q}}=12325 "prorogue (v.) 1: postpone, delay, defer"


**JULIET**

By whose direction foundest thou out this place?



**ROMEO**

By love, that first did prompt me to inquire.
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,
I would [adventure][24] for such merchandise.

[24]: {{page.q}}=873 "adventure (v.): venture, dare, chance, risk"


**JULIET**

Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
[Else][26] would a maiden blush [bepaint][25] my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
[Fain][28] would I [dwell][27] on [form][29] – fain, fain deny
What I have spoke. But farewell [compliment][30]!
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say ‘ Ay.’
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swearest,
Thou mayst prove [false][31]. At lovers' perjuries,
They say, Jove laughs. O [gentle][32] Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo. But else, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too [fond][33],
And therefore thou mayst think my '[haviour][34] [light][35].
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Than those that have more [cunning][36] to be strange.
I should have been more [strange][37], I must confess,
But that thou overheardest, ere I was [ware][38],
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
And not impute this [yielding][40] to [light][39] love,
Which the dark night hath so [discover][41]ed.

[25]: {{page.q}}=1743 "bepaint (v.): cover over, colour, tinge"
[26]: {{page.q}}=9622 "else (adv.) 1: otherwise"
[27]: {{page.q}}=9324 "dwell on / upon 1: preserve, maintain, pay attention to"
[28]: {{page.q}}=19773 "fain (adv.): gladly, willingly"
[29]: {{page.q}}=20265 "form (n.) 6: formal procedure, due process, formality"
[30]: {{page.q}}=3179 "compliment, complement (n.) 2: ceremony, etiquette, protocol"
[31]: {{page.q}}=19969 "false (adj.) 2: disloyal, faithless, inconstant, unfaithful"
[32]: {{page.q}}=17496 "gentle (adj.) 2: courteous, friendly, kind"
[33]: {{page.q}}=19981 "fond (adj.) 4: infatuated, doting, passionate"
[34]: {{page.q}}=18145 "haviour (n.): behaviour, manner, demeanour"
[35]: {{page.q}}=15367 "light (adj.) 6: facile, frivolous, of no consequence"
[36]: {{page.q}}=2840 "cunning (n.) 3: deviousness, deceit, craftiness, artfulness"
[37]: {{page.q}}=15811 "strange (adj.) 7: aloof, distant, reserved"
[38]: {{page.q}}=7546 "ware (adj.) 1: aware, conscious, sensible"
[39]: {{page.q}}=15367 "light (adj.) 6: facile, frivolous, of no consequence"
[40]: {{page.q}}=8281 "yielding (n.): consent, compliance, agreement"
[41]: {{page.q}}=8538 "discover (v.) 1: reveal, show, make known"


**ROMEO**

Lady, by yonder blessed moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops –



**JULIET**

O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her [circled][42] [orb][43],
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

[42]: {{page.q}}=3778 "circled (adj.) 1: in a circular motion, encircling"
[43]: {{page.q}}=11830 "orb (n.) 2: sphere, orbit, circle"


**ROMEO**

What shall I swear by?



**JULIET**

Do not swear at all.
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I'll believe thee.



**ROMEO**

If my heart's dear love –



**JULIET**

Well, do not swear. Although I [joy][44] in thee,
I have no joy of this contract tonight.
It is too rash, too [unadvised][45], too sudden;
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say ‘ It lightens.’ Sweet, good night!
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!

[44]: {{page.q}}=18888 "joy (v.) 1: feel joy, be happy, rejoice"
[45]: {{page.q}}=6740 "unadvised (adj.): rash, foolhardy, thoughtless, unconsidered"


**ROMEO**

O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?



**JULIET**

What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?



**ROMEO**

Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.



**JULIET**

I gave thee mine before thou didst request it.
And yet I would it were to give again.



**ROMEO**

Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?



**JULIET**

But to be [frank][46] and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
My [bounty][47] is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep. The more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
_Nurse calls within_
Anon, good Nurse! – Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little, I will come again.
_Exit Juliet_

[46]: {{page.q}}=20683 "frank (adj.) 1: generous, liberal, bounteous"
[47]: {{page.q}}=1909 "bounty (n.) 1: great generosity, gracious liberality, munificence"


**ROMEO**

O blessed, blessed night! I am [afeard][48],
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too [flattering-sweet][49] to be [substantial][50].
_Enter Juliet above_

[48]: {{page.q}}=10 "afeard (adj.): afraid, frightened, scared"
[49]: {{page.q}}=20597 "flattering-sweet (adj.): sweetly appealing, enticingly delightful"
[50]: {{page.q}}=16006 "substantial (adj.) 1: real, of substance, not imaginary"


**JULIET**

Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy [bent][51] of love be honourable,
Thy [purpose][52] marriage, send me word tomorrow,
By one that I'll [procure][53] to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

[51]: {{page.q}}=1490 "bent (n.) 1: direction, turning, inclination"
[52]: {{page.q}}=12449 "purpose (n.) 1: intention, aim, plan"
[53]: {{page.q}}=13435 "procure (v.) 1: bring, induce, make come"


**NURSE**

_(within)_
Madam!



**JULIET**

I come, [anon][54] – But if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech thee –

[54]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1: soon, shortly, presently"


**NURSE**

_(within)_
Madam!



**JULIET**

By and by I come –
To cease thy [strife][55] and leave me to my grief.
Tomorrow will I send.

[55]: {{page.q}}=15807 "strife (n.): striving, endeavour, strong effort"


**ROMEO**

So thrive my soul –



**JULIET**

A thousand times good night!
_Exit Juliet_



**ROMEO**

A thousand times the worse, to [want][56] thy light!
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
But love from love, toward school with [heavy][57] looks.
_Enter Juliet above again_

[56]: {{page.q}}=7539 "want (v.) 1: lack, need, be without"
[57]: {{page.q}}=18220 "heavy (adj.) 1: sorrowful, sad, gloomy"


**JULIET**

Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice,
To lure this [tassel-gentle][58] back again!
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
With repetition of ‘ My Romeo!’

[58]: {{page.q}}=6426 "tassel-gentle (n.): male peregrine falcon"


**ROMEO**

It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears!



**JULIET**

Romeo!

**ROMEO**

My [nyas][59]?

[59]: {{page.q}}=11530 "nyas: eyas, hawk nestling, young hawk"

**JULIET**

What o'clock tomorrow
Shall I send to thee?



**ROMEO**

By the hour of nine.



**JULIET**

I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.



**ROMEO**

Let me stand here till thou remember it.



**JULIET**

I shall forget, to have thee [still][60] stand there,
Remembering how I love thy company.

[60]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1: constantly, always, continually"


**ROMEO**

And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.



**JULIET**

'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone.
And yet no farther than a [wanton][61]'s bird,
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted [gyve][62]s,
And with a silken thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.

[61]: {{page.q}}=7661 "wanton (n.) 5: young rogue, scamp, rascal"
[62]: {{page.q}}=17570 "gyve (n.) 1: (plural) fetters, shackles"


**ROMEO**

I would I were thy bird.



**JULIET**

Sweet, so would I.
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow
That I shall say goodnight till it be [morrow][63].
_Exit Juliet_

[63]: {{page.q}}=10890 "morrow (n.): morning"


**ROMEO**

Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
The grey-eyed [morn][64] smiles on the frowning night,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And darkness [fleckled][65] like a drunkard reels
From forth day's pathway made by Titan's wheels.
Hence will I to my [ghostly][69] Friar's [close][67] [cell][66],
His help to [crave][68] and my dear [hap][70] to tell.
_Exit_

[64]: {{page.q}}=10474 "morn (n.): morning, dawn"
[65]: {{page.q}}=20598 "fleckled (adj.): dappled, flecked, speckled"
[66]: {{page.q}}=4172 "cell (n.): small humble dwelling"
[67]: {{page.q}}=3143 "close (adj.) 2: private, secluded, sequestered"
[68]: {{page.q}}=2904 "crave (v.) 1: beg, entreat, request"
[69]: {{page.q}}=17917 "ghostly (adj.): spiritual, holy"
[70]: {{page.q}}=15268 "hap (n.) 1: fortune, lot, fate"


