---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act II - Scene V
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 14:11:11 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act2_scene5.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Juliet_

**JULIET**

The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse.
In half an hour she promised to return.
[Perchance][1] she cannot meet him. That's not so.
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides than the sun's beams,
Driving back shadows over [louring][2] hills.
Therefore do [nimble-pinioned][3] doves draw love,
And therefore hath the [wind-swift][4] Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the [highmost][5] hill
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she [affection][6]s and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball.
My words would [bandy][7] her to my sweet love,
And his to me.
But old folks, many [feign][8] as they were dead –
Unwieldy, slow, [heavy][9] and pale as lead.
_Enter Nurse and Peter_
O God, she comes! O honey Nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

[1]: {{page.q}}=12175 "perchance (adv.) 1: perhaps, maybe"
[2]: {{page.q}}=19235 "louring (adj.) 1: gloomy, threatening, dark"
[3]: {{page.q}}=11531 "nimble-pinioned (adj.): swift-winged"
[4]: {{page.q}}=5800 "wind-swift (adj.): swift as the wind"
[5]: {{page.q}}=18715 "highmost, high-most (adj.): highest, topmost"
[6]: {{page.q}}=228 "affection (n.) 3: desire, passion, lustful feeling"
[7]: {{page.q}}=1745 "bandy (v.) 3: drive, strike, toss back"
[8]: {{page.q}}=20603 "feign (v.) 2: make appear, put on a demeanour"
[9]: {{page.q}}=18397 "heavy (adj.) 7: slow-moving, sluggish, laggard"


**NURSE**

Peter, [stay][10] at the gate.
_Exit Peter_

[10]: {{page.q}}=16211 "stay (v.) 2: linger, tarry, delay"


**JULIET**

Now, good sweet Nurse – O Lord, why lookest thou [sad][11]?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily.
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.

[11]: {{page.q}}=13906 "sad (adj.) 1: serious, grave, solemn"


**NURSE**

I am [aweary][12]. Give me leave a while.
Fie, how my bones ache! What a [jaunce][13] have I!

[12]: {{page.q}}=611 "aweary, a-weary (adj.): weary, tired"
[13]: {{page.q}}=18962 "jaunce (n.): jaunt, fatiguing journey"


**JULIET**

I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good Nurse, speak.



**NURSE**

Jesu, what haste! Can you not [stay][14] a while?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?

[14]: {{page.q}}=16211 "stay (v.) 2: linger, tarry, delay"


**JULIET**

How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Say either, and I'll stay the [circumstance][15].
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?

[15]: {{page.q}}=2638 "circumstance (n.) 1: detail(s), particular(s), specifics"


**NURSE**

Well, you have made a [simple][16] choice. You know
not how to choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though
his face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels all
men's; and for a hand and a foot, and a body, though
they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare.
He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll [warrant][17] him, as
gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, [wench][18]. Serve God. What,
have you dined at home?

[16]: {{page.q}}=14426 "simple (adj.) 2: foolish, silly, stupid"
[17]: {{page.q}}=7550 "warrant (v.) 1: assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"
[18]: {{page.q}}=7615 "wench (n.): girl, lass"


**JULIET**

No, no. But all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? What of that?



**NURSE**

Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back a't' other side – ah, my back, my back!
[Beshrew][19] your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with [jauncing][20] up and down!

[19]: {{page.q}}=1534 "beshrew, 'shrew (v.) 1: curse, devil take, evil befall"
[20]: {{page.q}}=18963 "jaunce (v.): jaunt, trudge about, run around"


**JULIET**

I'faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what says my love?



**NURSE**

Your love says, like an [honest][21] gentleman, and a
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I warrant,
a virtuous – Where is your mother?

[21]: {{page.q}}=18190 "honest (adj.) 2: honourable, respectable, upright"


**JULIET**

Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
‘ Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
“ Where is your mother? ”’



**NURSE**

O God's Lady dear!
Are you so [hot][22]? Marry come up, I trow.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.

[22]: {{page.q}}=18444 "hot (adj.) 2: enthusiastic, ardent, eager, keen"


**JULIET**

Here's such a [coil][23]! Come, what says Romeo?

[23]: {{page.q}}=3613 "coil (n.): turmoil, disturbance, fuss"


**NURSE**

Have you got leave to go to [shrift][24] today?

[24]: {{page.q}}=15983 "shrift (n.) 1: confession"


**JULIET**

I have.



**NURSE**

Then [hie][25] you hence to Friar Laurence' cell.
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the [wanton][26] blood up in your cheeks.
They'll be in scarlet [straight][27] at any news.
[Hie][28] you to church. I must another way,
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Must [climb][29] a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight.
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go. I'll to dinner. [Hie][30] you to the cell.

[25]: {{page.q}}=18172 "hie (v.): hasten, hurry, speed"
[26]: {{page.q}}=7541 "wanton (adj.) 3: unrestrained, undisciplined, boisterous, uncontrolled"
[27]: {{page.q}}=14086 "straight (adv.): straightaway, immediately, at once"
[28]: {{page.q}}=18172 "hie (v.): hasten, hurry, speed"
[29]: {{page.q}}=3822 "climb (v.): reach, attain, achieve"
[30]: {{page.q}}=18172 "hie (v.): hasten, hurry, speed"


**JULIET**

[Hie][31] to high fortune! Honest Nurse, farewell.
_Exeunt_

[31]: {{page.q}}=18172 "hie (v.): hasten, hurry, speed"


