---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act III - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 17:35:26 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act3_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Juliet alone_

**JULIET**

Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging! Such a [waggoner][1]
As Phaëton would whip you to the West
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaway's eyes may [wink][2], and Romeo
Leap to these arms untalked of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, [civil][3] night,
Thou [sober-suited][4] matron, all in black,
And [learn][5] me how to lose a winning match,
Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Hood my [unmanned][7] blood, [bating][6] in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle till [strange][8] love grow bold,
Think true love [act][9]ed simple modesty.
Come, night. Come, Romeo. Come, thou day in night;
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
Come, [gentle][10] night. Come, loving, black-browed night.
Give me my Romeo. And when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O I have bought the mansion of a love,
But not possessed it; and though I am sold,
Not yet enjoyed. So tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them.
_Enter Nurse, wringing her hands, with the ladder of cords_
O here comes my Nurse,
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
Now, Nurse, what news? What, hast thou there the cords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?

[1]: {{page.q}}=5802 "waggoner, wagoner (n.): driver, charioteer"
[2]: {{page.q}}=5803 "wink (v.) 2: [of the eyes] close, shut"
[3]: {{page.q}}=3584 "civil (adj.) 2: seemly, decent, well-behaved"
[4]: {{page.q}}=16460 "sober-suited (adj.): sedately dressed"
[5]: {{page.q}}=19111 "learn (v.) 1: teach, instruct [not a regional dialect usage as in modern English]"
[6]: {{page.q}}=1571 "bate (v.) 6: [falconry] beat the wings, flutter"
[7]: {{page.q}}=7074 "unmanned (adj.): [falconry] untrained; also: without a husband"
[8]: {{page.q}}=15986 "strange (adj.) 5: unfamiliar, unknown, not previously experienced"
[9]: {{page.q}}=881 "act (v.) 2: enact, enforce, bring about"
[10]: {{page.q}}=21269 "gentle (adj.) 6: soft, tender, kind"


**NURSE**

Ay, ay, the cords.
_She throws them down_



**JULIET**

Ay me! what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?



**NURSE**

Ah, weraday! He's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
We are [undone][11], lady, we are undone!
Alack the day! he's gone, he's killed, he's dead!

[11]: {{page.q}}=7007 "undone (adj.): ruined, destroyed, brought down"


**JULIET**

Can heaven be so [envious][12]?

[12]: {{page.q}}=9645 "envious (adj.): malicious, spiteful, vindictive, full of enmity"


**NURSE**

Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!



**JULIET**

What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roared in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but ‘ Ay,’
And that bare vowel ‘ I ’ shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of [cockatrice][13].
I am not I, if there be such an ‘ I ’
Or those eyes shut that makes thee answer ‘ I.’
If he be slain, say ‘ Ay ’; or if not, ‘ No.’
Brief sounds [determine][14] of my [weal][15] or woe.

[13]: {{page.q}}=3443 "cockatrice (n.): murderous serpent, basilisk"
[14]: {{page.q}}=8702 "determine (v.) 1: make a decision [about], reach a conclusion [about]"
[15]: {{page.q}}=7562 "weal 2: welfare, well-being, prosperity"


**NURSE**

I saw the wound. I saw it with mine eyes –
God save the mark! – here on his manly breast.
A piteous [corse][16], a bloody piteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood,
All in [gore-blood][17]. I [swound][18]ed at the sight.

[16]: {{page.q}}=2740 "corse (n.): corpse, dead body"
[17]: {{page.q}}=18048 "gore-blood (n.): gory blood, clotted blood"
[18]: {{page.q}}=14123 "swound (v.): faint, swoon"


**JULIET**

O, [break][20], my heart! Poor [bankrupt][19], break at once!
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press one [heavy][21] bier!

[19]: {{page.q}}=1333 "bancrout, bankrout, bankerout (n./adj./v.): bankrupt"
[20]: {{page.q}}=2403 "break (v.) 18: go bankrupt, become insolvent"
[21]: {{page.q}}=18220 "heavy (adj.) 1: sorrowful, sad, gloomy"


**NURSE**

O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
O courteous Tybalt, [honest][22] gentleman!
That ever I should live to see thee dead!

[22]: {{page.q}}=18190 "honest (adj.) 2: honourable, respectable, upright"


**JULIET**

What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughtered, and is Tybalt dead,
My dearest cousin and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the General [Doom][23]!
For who is living, if those two are gone?

[23]: {{page.q}}=8460 "doom (n.) 3: doomsday, day of judgement"


**NURSE**

Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Romeo that killed him, he is banished.



**JULIET**

O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?



**NURSE**

It did, it did! Alas the day, it did!



**JULIET**

O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful [tyrant][24]! fiend angelical!
Dove-feathered raven! [Wolvish-ravening][25] lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou [justly][26] seemest –
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
When thou didst [bower][27] the spirit of a fiend
In [mortal][28] paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile [matter][29]
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!

[24]: {{page.q}}=6207 "tyrant (n.) 1: pitiless ruffian, cruel villain"
[25]: {{page.q}}=5804 "wolvish-ravening (adj.): devouring like a wolf"
[26]: {{page.q}}=18842 "justly (adv.): exactly, precisely, closely"
[27]: {{page.q}}=1746 "bower (v.): enclose, fence in"
[28]: {{page.q}}=10701 "mortal (adj.) 2: human, subject to death, characterized by mortality"
[29]: {{page.q}}=10417 "matter (n.) 1: subject-matter, content, substance"


**NURSE**

There's no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured,
All [forsworn][31], all [naught][32], all [dissembler][30]s.
Ah, where's my man? Give me some [aqua vitae][33].
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo!

[30]: {{page.q}}=9100 "dissembler (n.): hypocrite, deceiver, charlatan"
[31]: {{page.q}}=19872 "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 1: swear falsely, perjure [oneself], break one's word"
[32]: {{page.q}}=11422 "naught, nought (adj.) 3: bad, wicked, sinful"
[33]: {{page.q}}=273 "aqua-vitae (n.): spirits, alcohol, strong drink, brandy"


**JULIET**

Blistered be thy tongue
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Upon his [brow][34] shame is ashamed to sit.
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crowned
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
O, what a beast was I to [chide][35] at him!

[34]: {{page.q}}=2299 "brow (n.) 4: forehead [often plural, referring to the two prominences of the forehead]"
[35]: {{page.q}}=4299 "chide (v.), past form chid 1: scold, rebuke, reprove"


**NURSE**

Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?



**JULIET**

Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall [smooth][36] thy name
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have killed my husband.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!
Your [tributary][37] drops belong to woe,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.
All this is comfort. Wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
That murdered me. I would forget it [fain][38].
But O, it presses to my memory
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds!
‘ Tybalt is dead, and Romeo – banished.’
That ‘ banished,’ that one word ‘ banished,’
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Was woe enough, if it had ended there;
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
And [needly][39] will be [rank][40]ed with other griefs,
Why followed not, when she said ‘ Tybalt's dead,’
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Which [modern][41] lamentation might have moved?
But with a [rearward][42] following Tybalt's death,
‘ Romeo is banished ’ – to speak that word
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. ‘ Romeo is banished ’ –
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word's death. No words can that woe [sound][43].
Where is my father and my mother, Nurse?

[36]: {{page.q}}=15987 "smooth (v.) 4: defend, gild, speak well of"
[37]: {{page.q}}=6432 "tributary (adj.): paying a tribute, contributory"
[38]: {{page.q}}=19773 "fain (adv.): gladly, willingly"
[39]: {{page.q}}=11532 "needly (adv.): of necessity, unavoidably"
[40]: {{page.q}}=17320 "rank (v.) 3: find, accompany [by]"
[41]: {{page.q}}=10459 "modern (adj.): ordinary, trite, commonplace, everyday"
[42]: {{page.q}}=17315 "rearward (n.) 2: rearguard action"
[43]: {{page.q}}=15614 "sound (v.) 3: cry out, declare, proclaim"


**NURSE**

Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's [corse][44].
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

[44]: {{page.q}}=2740 "corse (n.): corpse, dead body"


**JULIET**

Wash they his wounds with tears. Mine shall be [spent][45],
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are [beguile][46]d,
Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled.
He made you for a highway to my bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come, cords. Come, Nurse. I'll to my wedding bed,
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!

[45]: {{page.q}}=14944 "spend (v.) 1: use up, wear out, exhaust, bring to an end"
[46]: {{page.q}}=1438 "beguile (v.) 1: cheat, deceive, trick"


**NURSE**

[Hie][47] to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
To comfort you. I [wot][48] well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
I'll to him. He is hid at Laurence' cell.

[47]: {{page.q}}=18172 "hie (v.): hasten, hurry, speed"
[48]: {{page.q}}=7655 "wot (v.) 1: learn, know, be told"


**JULIET**

O, find him! Give this ring to my true knight
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
_Exit Juliet with Nurse_



