---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act III - Scene V
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 17:44:29 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act3_scene5.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft, at the window_

**JULIET**

Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the [fearful][1] hollow of thine ear.
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

[1]: {{page.q}}=19970 "fearful (adj.) 1: timid, timorous, frightened, full of fear"


**ROMEO**

It was the lark, the herald of the [morn][2];
No nightingale. Look, love, what [envious][3] streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.
Night's candles are burnt out, and [jocund][4] day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

[2]: {{page.q}}=10474 "morn (n.): morning, dawn"
[3]: {{page.q}}=9645 "envious (adj.): malicious, spiteful, vindictive, full of enmity"
[4]: {{page.q}}=18848 "jocund (adj.): merry, joyful, cheerful"


**JULIET**

Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.
It is some [meteor][6] that the sun [exhale][5]s
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet. Thou needest not to be gone.

[5]: {{page.q}}=10047 "exhale (v.) 1: cause to flow, draw out, draw up"
[6]: {{page.q}}=11124 "meteor (n.): aurora, luminous emanation, atmospheric effect"


**ROMEO**

Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
I am [content][7], so thou wilt have it so.
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye;
'Tis but the pale [reflex][9] of Cynthia's [brow][8].
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
The [vaulty][10] heaven so high above our heads.
I have more [care][11] to stay than [will][12] to go.
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
How is't, my soul? Let's talk. It is not day.

[7]: {{page.q}}=2862 "content (adj.) 1: agreeable, willing, ready"
[8]: {{page.q}}=1915 "brow (n.) 3: eyebrow"
[9]: {{page.q}}=17316 "reflex (n.): reflection, image, shadow"
[10]: {{page.q}}=7460 "vaulty (adj.) 1: resembling a vault, arched, domed"
[11]: {{page.q}}=4070 "care (n.) 7: desire, inclination, concern"
[12]: {{page.q}}=7725 "will (n.) 1: desire, wish, liking, inclination"


**JULIET**

It is, it is! [Hie][13] hence, be gone, away!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing [sharp][14]s.
Some say the lark makes sweet [division][15].
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some say the lark and loathed toad [change][16] eyes.
O, now I would they had changed voices too,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us [affray][17],
Hunting thee hence with [hunt's-up][18] to the day.
O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.

[13]: {{page.q}}=18172 "hie (v.): hasten, hurry, speed"
[14]: {{page.q}}=16422 "sharp (n.): high-pitched note, shrill sound"
[15]: {{page.q}}=8946 "division (n.) 2: [music] variation, modulation"
[16]: {{page.q}}=4340 "change (v.) 1: exchange, trade"
[17]: {{page.q}}=888 "affray (v.): scare, startle, frighten away"
[18]: {{page.q}}=18716 "hunt's-up (n.): daybreak song to wake huntsmen [or a newly married wife]"


**ROMEO**

More light and light: more [dark][19] and dark our woes.
_Enter Nurse hastily_

[19]: {{page.q}}=8552 "dark (adj.) 1: sad, melancholic, gloomy"


**NURSE**

Madam!



**JULIET**

Nurse?



**NURSE**

Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
The day is broke. Be wary. Look about.
_Exit Nurse_



**JULIET**

Then, window, let day in, and let life out.



**ROMEO**

Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
_He goes down_



**JULIET**

Art thou gone so, love-lord, aye husband-friend?
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days.
O by this [count][20] I shall be much in [years][21]
Ere I again behold my Romeo.

[20]: {{page.q}}=2903 "count (n.) 1: account, reckoning"
[21]: {{page.q}}=8341 "years (n.) 1: age"


**ROMEO**

Farewell!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.



**JULIET**

O, thinkest thou we shall ever meet again?



**ROMEO**

I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our times to come.



**JULIET**

O God, I have an [ill-divining][22] soul!
[Methinks][23] I see thee, now thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou lookest pale.

[22]: {{page.q}}=5294 "ill-divining (adj.): giving premonitions of harm, ominously prophesying"
[23]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.): it seems /seemed to me"


**ROMEO**

And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
_Exit Romeo_



**JULIET**

O Fortune, Fortune! All men call thee fickle.
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renowned for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
But send him back.
_She goes down from the window_
_Enter Juliet's mother_



**LADY CAPULET**

Ho, daughter! Are you up?



**JULIET**

Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.
Is she not [down][24] so late, or up so early?
What [unaccustomed][26] cause [procure][25]s her hither?

[24]: {{page.q}}=9316 "down (adv.) 2: in bed"
[25]: {{page.q}}=13435 "procure (v.) 1: bring, induce, make come"
[26]: {{page.q}}=6747 "unaccustomed (adj.): unusual, strange, unfamiliar"


**LADY CAPULET**

Why, how now, Juliet?



**JULIET**

Madam, I am not well.



**LADY CAPULET**

Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
But much of grief shows [still][27] some want of [wit][28].

[27]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1: constantly, always, continually"
[28]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1: intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"


**JULIET**

Yet let me weep for such a [feeling][29] loss.

[29]: {{page.q}}=20277 "feeling (adj.) 1: deeply felt, heartfelt, acutely sensed"


**LADY CAPULET**

So shall you feel the loss, but not the [friend][30]
Which you weep for.

[30]: {{page.q}}=20682 "friend (n.) 2: relation, relative, kinsman"


**JULIET**

Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the [friend][31].

[31]: {{page.q}}=19922 "friend (n.) 1: lover, sweetheart, suitor"


**LADY CAPULET**

Well, girl, thou weepest not so much for his death
As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.



**JULIET**

What villain, madam?



**LADY CAPULET**

That same villain Romeo.



**JULIET**

_(aside)_
Villain and he be many miles asunder. –
God pardon! I do, with all my heart.
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.



**LADY CAPULET**

That is because the traitor murderer lives.



**JULIET**

Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Would none but I might [venge][32] my cousin's death!

[32]: {{page.q}}=7264 "venge (v.): avenge, revenge"


**LADY CAPULET**

We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banished [runagate][33] doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustomed [dram][34]
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company.
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.

[33]: {{page.q}}=16985 "runagate (n.) 1: runaway, vagabond, fugitive"
[34]: {{page.q}}=8497 "dram (n.) 2: [small dose of] poison"


**JULIET**

Indeed I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo till I behold him – dead –
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman [vex][35]ed.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would [temper][36] it –
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him named and cannot come to him,
To [wreak][37] the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that hath slaughtered him!

[35]: {{page.q}}=7261 "vex (v.): afflict, trouble, torment"
[36]: {{page.q}}=5435 "temper (v.) 1: blend, mix, concoct, compound"
[37]: {{page.q}}=8125 "wreak (v.) 2: inflict, deliver, bestow"


**LADY CAPULET**

Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.



**JULIET**

And joy comes well in such a needy time.
What are they, beseech your ladyship?



**LADY CAPULET**

Well, well, thou hast a [careful][38] father, child:
One who, to put thee from thy [heaviness][39],
Hath [sort][40]ed out a [sudden][41] day of joy
That thou expects not nor I looked not for.

[38]: {{page.q}}=4071 "careful (adj.) 2: provident, caring, solicitous"
[39]: {{page.q}}=18276 "heaviness (n.) 1: sadness, grief, sorrow"
[40]: {{page.q}}=15990 "sort out (v.): arrange, contrive, prepare"
[41]: {{page.q}}=15133 "sudden (adj.) 3: immediate, early, prompt"


**JULIET**

Madam, in [happy][42] time! What day is that?

[42]: {{page.q}}=18718 "happy time, in 2: coming just at the right time"


**LADY CAPULET**

Marry, my child, early next Thursday [morn][43]
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

[43]: {{page.q}}=10474 "morn (n.): morning, dawn"


**JULIET**

Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!



**LADY CAPULET**

Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.
_Enter Capulet and Nurse_



**CAPULET**

When the sun sets the earth doth drizzle dew,
But for the sunset of my brother's son
It rains [downright][44].
How now? A [conduit][45], girl? What, still in tears?
Evermore showering? In one little body
Thou [counterfeit][47]est a [bark][46], a sea, a wind.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears. The bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood. The winds, thy sighs,
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm will [overset][48]
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Have you [deliver][50]ed to her our [decree][49]?

[44]: {{page.q}}=9024 "downright (adj.) 2: directed straight down, coming from above"
[45]: {{page.q}}=2908 "conduit (n.) 3: channel, outflowing, water-spout, fountain"
[46]: {{page.q}}=1410 "bark, barque (n.): ship, vessel"
[47]: {{page.q}}=2890 "counterfeit (v.) 1: copy, imitate, simulate"
[48]: {{page.q}}=12015 "overset (v.) 2: overturn, capsize, overwhelm"
[49]: {{page.q}}=9317 "decree (n.) 2: arrangement, decision, resolve"
[50]: {{page.q}}=9212 "deliver (v.) 1: report [to], communicate [to], tell, describe"


**LADY CAPULET**

Ay, sir. But she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave!



**CAPULET**

Soft! [Take][51] me with you, take me with you, wife.
How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, that we have [wrought][52]
So worthy a gentleman to be her [bride][53]?

[51]: {{page.q}}=6433 "take me with you: I don't understand you"
[52]: {{page.q}}=7728 "work (v.), past form wrought 1: bring about, arrange, effect"
[53]: {{page.q}}=1749 "bride (n.): bridegroom, spouse"


**JULIET**

Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.



**CAPULET**

How, how, how, how, [chopped][54] logic? What is this?
‘ Proud ’ – and ‘ I thank you ’ – and ‘ I thank you not ’ –
And yet ‘ not proud ’? Mistress [minion][55] you,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But [fettle][56] your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on a [hurdle][57] thither.
Out, you [green-sickness][60] [carrion][59]! Out, you [baggage][58]!
You [tallow-face][61]!

[54]: {{page.q}}=4517 "chopped logic (n.): contentious arguer, disputatious wretch"
[55]: {{page.q}}=10629 "minion (n.) 2: hussy, jade, minx"
[56]: {{page.q}}=20608 "fettle (v.): make ready, put in order"
[57]: {{page.q}}=18722 "hurdle (n.): cart, frame [as used for dragging traitors to execution]"
[58]: {{page.q}}=1388 "baggage (n.): good-for-nothing woman, harlot"
[59]: {{page.q}}=4216 "carrion (n.) 1: carcass, wretch, worthless beast"
[60]: {{page.q}}=18052 "green-sickness (adj.): affected by green-sickness"
[61]: {{page.q}}=6434 "tallow-face (n.): [contemptuous] face as pale as wax"


**LADY CAPULET**

Fie, fie! What, are you mad?



**JULIET**

Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.



**CAPULET**

Hang thee, young baggage! Disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what – get thee to church a' Thursday
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
That God had lent us but this only child.
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, [hilding][62]!

[62]: {{page.q}}=18236 "hilding (n.): good-for-nothing, worthless individual"


**NURSE**

God in heaven bless her!
You are to [blame][63], my lord, to [rate][64] her so.

[63]: {{page.q}}=1400 "blame, to: to be blamed, blameworthy"
[64]: {{page.q}}=16713 "rate (v.) 1: berate, reproach, rebuke, scold"


**CAPULET**

And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,
Good Prudence. [Smatter][66] with your [gossip][65]s, go!

[65]: {{page.q}}=17893 "gossip (n.) 3: tattler, chatterer, idle talker"
[66]: {{page.q}}=15991 "smatter (v.): prattle, chatter, babble away"


**NURSE**

I speak no treason.



**CAPULET**

O, God-i-good-e'en!



**NURSE**

May not one speak?



**CAPULET**

Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your [gravity][68] o'er a [gossip][67]'s bowl,
For here we need it not.

[67]: {{page.q}}=17743 "gossip (n.) 4: old woman, gossiping woman"
[68]: {{page.q}}=18049 "gravity (n.) 3: wisdom, sage advice"


**LADY CAPULET**

You are too [hot][69].

[69]: {{page.q}}=18291 "hot (adj.) 1: hot-tempered, angry, passionate"


**CAPULET**

God's bread! It makes me mad.
Day, night; hour, [tide][70], time; work, play;
Alone, in company; [still][72] my [care][71] hath been
To have her [match][73]ed. And having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair [demesne][74]s, youthful, and nobly trained,
[Stuffed][76], as they say, with honourable [part][75]s,
Proportioned as one's thought would wish a man –
And then to have a wretched [puling][77] fool,
A whining [mammet][78], in her fortune's [tender][79],
To answer ‘ I'll not wed, I cannot love;
I am too young, I pray you pardon me ’!
But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you!
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look to't, think on't. I do not [use][80] to jest.
Thursday is near. Lay hand on heart. [Advise][81].
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend.
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust to't. [Bethink][82] you. I'll not be [forsworn][83].
_Exit Capulet_

[70]: {{page.q}}=6435 "tide (n.) 1: season, date, time [of year]"
[71]: {{page.q}}=3988 "care (n.) 2: responsibility, duty, matter of concern"
[72]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1: constantly, always, continually"
[73]: {{page.q}}=10866 "match (v.) 1: join in marriage, make a match"
[74]: {{page.q}}=8918 "demesne (n.): (plural) territories, lands, dominions"
[75]: {{page.q}}=12150 "part (n.) 1: quality, attribute, gift, accomplishment [of mind or body]"
[76]: {{page.q}}=14980 "stuffed (adj.) 1: full, complete, proven, stored up"
[77]: {{page.q}}=12599 "puling (n./adj.) 1: whimpering, whining, complaining"
[78]: {{page.q}}=10678 "mammet (n.): doll, puppet"
[79]: {{page.q}}=5732 "tender (n.) 2: proposal of marriage, offer of betrothal"
[80]: {{page.q}}=6700 "use (v.) 1: be accustomed, make a habit [of]"
[81]: {{page.q}}=871 "advise, avise (v.) 1: consider, take thought, reflect"
[82]: {{page.q}}=1455 "bethink (v.), past form bethought 1: call to mind, think about, consider, reflect"
[83]: {{page.q}}=20685 "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 3: deny, repudiate, refuse to admit"


**JULIET**

Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
Delay this marriage for a month, a week.
Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.



**LADY CAPULET**

Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
_Exit Lady Capulet_



**JULIET**

O God! – O Nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
How shall that faith return again to earth
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
Alack, alack, that heaven should [practise][84] [stratagem][85]s
Upon so soft a [subject][86] as myself!
What sayest thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, Nurse.

[84]: {{page.q}}=13339 "practise on / upon (v.) 1: plot against"
[85]: {{page.q}}=15785 "stratagem (n.) 1: scheme, device, cunning plan"
[86]: {{page.q}}=15854 "subject (n.) 3: object, thing, creature"


**NURSE**

Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banished; and all the world to [nothing][87]
That he dares ne'er come back to [challenge][88] you.
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the [case][89] so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the [County][90].
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Romeo's a [dishclout][91] to him. An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. [Beshrew][92] my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
Your first is dead – or 'twere as good he were
As living here and you no use of him.

[87]: {{page.q}}=11533 "nothing, all the world to: the odds are a million to one"
[88]: {{page.q}}=4380 "challenge (v.) 1: demand as a right, claim, call for, insist on"
[89]: {{page.q}}=4136 "case (n.) 1: state, plight, situation, circumstance"
[90]: {{page.q}}=3568 "county (n.) 1: [title of rank] count"
[91]: {{page.q}}=9318 "dishclout (n.): dishcloth, rag"
[92]: {{page.q}}=1534 "beshrew, 'shrew (v.) 1: curse, devil take, evil befall"


**JULIET**

Speakest thou from thy heart?



**NURSE**

And from my soul too. Else [beshrew][93] them both.

[93]: {{page.q}}=1534 "beshrew, 'shrew (v.) 1: curse, devil take, evil befall"


**JULIET**

Amen!



**NURSE**

What?



**JULIET**

Well, thou hast comforted me [marvellous][94] much.
Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,
To make confession and to be absolved.

[94]: {{page.q}}=10411 "marvellous (adv.): very, extremely, exceedingly"


**NURSE**

Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.
_Exit Nurse_



**JULIET**

Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus [forsworn][95],
Or to [dispraise][96] my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above [compare][97]
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!
Thou and my [bosom][98] henceforth shall be [twain][99].
I'll to the Friar to know his remedy.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
_Exit_

[95]: {{page.q}}=19872 "forswear (v), past forms forsworn, forswore 1: swear falsely, perjure [oneself], break one's word"
[96]: {{page.q}}=8758 "dispraise (v.): disparage, belittle, denigrate"
[97]: {{page.q}}=3781 "compare, above: beyond comparison"
[98]: {{page.q}}=2130 "bosom (n.) 2: inward thoughts, personal counsel"
[99]: {{page.q}}=6436 "twain (adj.): separated, not united, estranged"


