---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act III - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 17:29:55 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act3_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, and their men_

**BENVOLIO**

I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
The day is hot, the Capels are abroad.
And if we meet we shall not '[scape][1] a brawl,
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

[1]: {{page.q}}=14263 "scape, 'scape (v.): escape, avoid"


**MERCUTIO**

Thou art like one of those fellows that, when
he enters the [confine][3]s of a tavern, [clap][2]s me his sword
upon the table and says ‘ God send me no need of thee!’,
and by the [operation][5] of the second cup [draw][4]s him on the
[drawer][6], when indeed there is no need.

[2]: {{page.q}}=4704 "clap (v.) 4: put smartly, place promptly, set effectively"
[3]: {{page.q}}=3198 "confine (n.) 2: limit, bound, domain"
[4]: {{page.q}}=8910 "draw (v.) 10: draw a sword"
[5]: {{page.q}}=11669 "operation (n.) 1: effect, force, influence, power"
[6]: {{page.q}}=8825 "drawer (n.): one who draws drink from a cask, tapster, barman"


**BENVOLIO**

Am I like such a fellow?



**MERCUTIO**

Come, come, thou art as hot a [Jack][7] in thy
mood as any in Italy; and as soon [move][9]d to be [moody][8],
and as soon moody to be [move][10]d.

[7]: {{page.q}}=18880 "Jack (n.) 1: Jack-in-office, ill-mannered fellow, lout, knave"
[8]: {{page.q}}=10599 "moody (adj.) 1: angry, wrathful, rancorous, sullen"
[9]: {{page.q}}=10486 "move (v.) 3: encourage, instigate, prompt"
[10]: {{page.q}}=10634 "move (v.) 2: move to anger, provoke, exasperate"


**BENVOLIO**

And what to?



**MERCUTIO**

Nay, an there were two such, we should have
none shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! Why,
thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a
hair less in his beard than thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel
with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but
because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye
would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of
quarrels as an egg is full of [meat][11]; and yet thy head hath
been beaten as [addle][12] as an egg for quarrelling. Thou
hast quarrelled with a man for coughing in the street,
because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in
the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing
his new doublet before Easter; with another for tying
his new shoes with old [riband][13]? And yet thou wilt tutor
me from quarrelling!

[11]: {{page.q}}=10545 "meat (n.) 1: food, nourishment"
[12]: {{page.q}}=884 "addle (adj.): addled, rotten, putrid"
[13]: {{page.q}}=16634 "riband (n.): ribbon"


**BENVOLIO**

An I were so [apt][14] to quarrel as thou art, any
man should buy the [fee simple][15] of my life for an hour
and a quarter.

[14]: {{page.q}}=43 "apt (adj.) 1: fit, ready, prepared"
[15]: {{page.q}}=20449 "fee-simple, fee simple (n.): private estate [belonging to the owner and his heirs for ever]; permanent lease, full possession"


**MERCUTIO**

The fee-[simple][16]? O simple!
_Enter Tybalt and others_

[16]: {{page.q}}=14426 "simple (adj.) 2: foolish, silly, stupid"


**BENVOLIO**

By my head, here comes the Capulets.



**MERCUTIO**

By my heel, I care not.



**TYBALT**

Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Gentlemen, good-e'en. A word with one of you.



**MERCUTIO**

And but one word with one of us? Couple it
with something. Make it a word and a blow.



**TYBALT**

You shall find me [apt][17] enough to that, sir, an you
will give me [occasion][18].

[17]: {{page.q}}=43 "apt (adj.) 1: fit, ready, prepared"
[18]: {{page.q}}=11685 "occasion (n.) 2: ground, reason, cause, matter"


**MERCUTIO**

Could you not take some occasion without
giving?



**TYBALT**

Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.



**MERCUTIO**

Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels?
An thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but
discords. Here's my fiddlestick. Here's that shall make
you dance. Zounds, consort!



**BENVOLIO**

We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
And [reason][20] [coldly][19] of your grievances,
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.

[19]: {{page.q}}=2819 "coldly (adv.) 1: calmly, coolly, objectively, rationally"
[20]: {{page.q}}=16993 "reason (v.) 3: raise, bring up, discuss"


**MERCUTIO**

Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
_Enter Romeo_



**TYBALT**

Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.



**MERCUTIO**

But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your [livery][21].
Marry, go [before][22] to [field][23], he'll be your [follower][24]!
Your worship in that sense may call him ‘ man.’

[21]: {{page.q}}=19153 "livery (n.) 1: uniform, costume, special clothing"
[22]: {{page.q}}=1601 "before (adv.) 1: ahead, in advance"
[23]: {{page.q}}=20604 "field (n.) 2: duelling place"
[24]: {{page.q}}=20605 "follower (n.): second, attendant"


**TYBALT**

Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
No better term than this: thou art a villain.



**ROMEO**

Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the [appertaining][25] rage
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
Therefore farewell, I see thou knowest me not.

[25]: {{page.q}}=874 "appertaining (adj.): related, relevant, appropriate"


**TYBALT**

Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me. Therefore turn and [draw][26].

[26]: {{page.q}}=8910 "draw (v.) 10: draw a sword"


**ROMEO**

I do protest I never [injured][27] thee,
But love thee better than thou canst [devise][28]
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.
And so, good Capulet, which name I [tender][29]
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.

[27]: {{page.q}}=5295 "injury (v.): injure, wrong, do injustice to"
[28]: {{page.q}}=9085 "devise (v.) 2: invent, imagine, make up [an account]"
[29]: {{page.q}}=5442 "tender (v.) 3: rate, esteem, regard"


**MERCUTIO**

O calm, dishonourable, vile [submission][30]!
_Alla stoccata carries it away._
_He draws_
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?

[30]: {{page.q}}=14323 "submission (n.): compliance, deference, obedience"


**TYBALT**

What wouldst thou have with me?



**MERCUTIO**

Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your
nine lives. That I mean to make bold withal, and, as you
shall [use][32] me hereafter, [dry-beat][31] the rest of the eight.
Will you pluck your sword out of his [pilcher][33] by the ears?
Make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.

[31]: {{page.q}}=9310 "dry-beat (v.): cudgel, thrash, beat soundly"
[32]: {{page.q}}=7006 "use (v.) 2: treat, deal with, manage"
[33]: {{page.q}}=13433 "pilcher (n.) 2: [contemptuous] scabbard"


**TYBALT**

I am for you.
_He draws_



**ROMEO**

Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.



**MERCUTIO**

_Come, sir, your passado!_
_They fight_



**ROMEO**

Draw, Benvolio. Beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame! [Forbear][34] this outrage!
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Forbid this [bandying][35] in Verona streets.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
_Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio_

[34]: {{page.q}}=19856 "forbear (v.) 1: stop, cease, desist"
[35]: {{page.q}}=1737 "bandying (n.): verbal strife, exchange of words"


**A FOLLOWER**

Away, Tybalt!
_Exit Tybalt with his followers_



**MERCUTIO**

I am hurt.
A plague a' both houses! I am [sped][36].
Is he gone and hath nothing?

[36]: {{page.q}}=15906 "speed (v.) 4: deal with, bring to an end, defeat"


**BENVOLIO**

What, art thou hurt?



**MERCUTIO**

Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Where is my page? Go, [villain][38], fetch a [surgeon][37].
_Exit Page_

[37]: {{page.q}}=14719 "surgeon (n.): doctor, physician"
[38]: {{page.q}}=7224 "villain (n.) 1: serf, servant, bondman"


**ROMEO**

Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.



**MERCUTIO**

No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as
a church door. But 'tis enough.'Twill serve. Ask for me
tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I am peppered,
I [warrant][39], for this world. A plague a' both your
houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch
a man to death! A braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights
by the book of [arithmetic][40]! Why the devil came you between
us? I was hurt under your arm.

[39]: {{page.q}}=7550 "warrant (v.) 1: assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"
[40]: {{page.q}}=235 "arithmetic (n.): calculation, computation, reckoning"


**ROMEO**

I thought all for the best.



**MERCUTIO**

Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague a'both your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me.
I have it, and soundly too. Your houses!
_Exit Mercutio with Benvolio_



**ROMEO**

This gentleman, the Prince's near [ally][41],
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
In my behalf – my reputation stained
With Tybalt's slander – Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my cousin. O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my [temper][42] softened valour's steel!
_Enter Benvolio_

[41]: {{page.q}}=885 "ally (n.): relative, relation, kinsman"
[42]: {{page.q}}=5535 "temper (n.) 1: frame of mind, temperament, disposition"


**BENVOLIO**

O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead!
That gallant spirit hath [aspire][43]d the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

[43]: {{page.q}}=875 "aspire (v.) 1: ascend, rise up, climb [to]"


**ROMEO**

This day's black fate on more days doth [depend][44].
This but begins the woe others must end.
_Enter Tybalt_

[44]: {{page.q}}=9311 "depend (v.) 2: have consequences for, menace, hover over"


**BENVOLIO**

Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.



**ROMEO**

Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven [respective][46] [lenity][45],
And fire-eyed fury be my [conduct][47] now!
Now, Tybalt, take the ‘ villain ’ back again
That late thou gavest me. For Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.

[45]: {{page.q}}=19258 "lenity (n.): mildness, gentleness, mercifulness"
[46]: {{page.q}}=17288 "respective (adj.) 1: careful, attentive, considerate"
[47]: {{page.q}}=3062 "conduct (n.) 5: escort, attendant, guide"


**TYBALT**

Thou, wretched boy, that didst [consort][48] him here,
Shalt with him hence.

[48]: {{page.q}}=2986 "consort (v.): accompany, attend, go with"


**ROMEO**

This shall determine that.
_They fight. Tybalt falls_



**BENVOLIO**

Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are [up][49], and Tybalt slain.
Stand not [amazed][50]. The Prince will [doom][51] thee death
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!

[49]: {{page.q}}=7082 "up (adv.) 3: roused, agitated, angry"
[50]: {{page.q}}=356 "amazed (adj.): dumbfounded, stunned, thunderstruck, overwhelmed"
[51]: {{page.q}}=9005 "doom (v.) 1: decree, decide, adjudge"


**ROMEO**

O, I am fortune's fool!



**BENVOLIO**

Why dost thou stay?
_Exit Romeo_
_Enter Citizens_



**CITIZENS**

Which way ran he that killed Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?



**BENVOLIO**

There lies that Tybalt.



**CITIZEN**

Up, sir, go with me.
I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
_Enter Prince, Montague, Capulet, their wives, and all_



**PRINCE**

Where are the vile beginners of this fray?



**BENVOLIO**

O noble Prince, I can [discover][52] all
The unlucky [manage][53] of this fatal brawl.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, [brave][54] Mercutio.

[52]: {{page.q}}=8538 "discover (v.) 1: reveal, show, make known"
[53]: {{page.q}}=10399 "manage (n.) 1: management, handling, control [especially of a horse, as a result of training]"
[54]: {{page.q}}=2438 "brave (adj.) 2: noble, worthy, excellent"


**LADY CAPULET**

Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
O Prince! O cousin! Husband! O, the blood is spilled
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin!



**PRINCE**

Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?



**BENVOLIO**

Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay.
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him [bethink][55]
How [nice][56] the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure. All this – uttered
With [gentle][57] breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed –
Could not take [truce][59] with the unruly [spleen][58]
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he [tilt][60]s
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
Who, all as [hot][61], turns deadly point to point,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
[Retort][62]s it. Romeo he cries aloud,
‘ Hold, friends! Friends, part!’ and swifter than his tongue
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An [envious][63] thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But [by and by][64] comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly [entertain][65]ed revenge,
And to't they go like lightning. For, ere I
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain.
And as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

[55]: {{page.q}}=1455 "bethink (v.), past form bethought 1: call to mind, think about, consider, reflect"
[56]: {{page.q}}=11439 "nice (adj.) 5: trivial, unimportant, slight"
[57]: {{page.q}}=18076 "gentle (adj.) 4: peaceful, calm, free from violence"
[58]: {{page.q}}=14540 "spleen (n.) 2: irritability, malice, bad temper"
[59]: {{page.q}}=6431 "truce, take: come to terms, negotiate"
[60]: {{page.q}}=5706 "tilt (v.): joust, fight [with lances], thrust"
[61]: {{page.q}}=18291 "hot (adj.) 1: hot-tempered, angry, passionate"
[62]: {{page.q}}=17314 "retort (v.) 1: turn back, return, reflect"
[63]: {{page.q}}=9645 "envious (adj.): malicious, spiteful, vindictive, full of enmity"
[64]: {{page.q}}=1833 "by and by (adv.) 1: immediately, straightaway, directly"
[65]: {{page.q}}=10033 "entertain (v.) 7: admit into consideration, grant as a possibility"


**LADY CAPULET**

He is a kinsman to the Montague.
[Affection][66] makes him [false][67]. He speaks not true.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.
Romeo slew Tybalt. Romeo must not live.

[66]: {{page.q}}=886 "affection (n.) 7: partiality, biased feeling"
[67]: {{page.q}}=20466 "false (adj.) 4: wrong, mistaken"


**PRINCE**

Romeo slew him. He slew Mercutio.
Who now the price of his dear [blood][68] doth [owe][69]?

[68]: {{page.q}}=2408 "blood (n.) 9: life-blood, spirit"
[69]: {{page.q}}=11736 "owe (v.) 2: repay, compensate, pay back"


**MONTAGUE**

Not Romeo, Prince. He was Mercutio's friend;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.



**PRINCE**

And for that offence
Immediately we do exile him hence.
I have an [interest][70] in your hate's proceeding,
My [blood][71] for your [rude][72] brawls doth lie a-bleeding.
But I'll [amerce][73] you with so [strong][74] a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses.
[Nor][76] tears nor prayers shall [purchase][77] out [abuse][75]s.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body, and [attend][78] our [will][79].
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
_Exeunt_

[70]: {{page.q}}=5292 "interest (n.) 4: personal involvement, special concern"
[71]: {{page.q}}=1777 "blood (n.) 6: blood relationship, kinship"
[72]: {{page.q}}=16651 "rude (adj.) 1: violent, harsh, unkind"
[73]: {{page.q}}=887 "amerce (v.): penalize, punish financially"
[74]: {{page.q}}=16520 "strong (adj.) 4: severe, oppressive, grievous"
[75]: {{page.q}}=718 "abuse (n.) 2: offence, wrong, insult, transgression"
[76]: {{page.q}}=11529 "nor ... nor (prep.): neither...nor"
[77]: {{page.q}}=13434 "purchase out (v.): buy off punishment for"
[78]: {{page.q}}=324 "attend (v.) 6: regard, consider"
[79]: {{page.q}}=7725 "will (n.) 1: desire, wish, liking, inclination"


