---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act III - Scene III
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 17:40:04 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act3_scene3.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Friar Laurence_

**FRIAR**

Romeo, come forth. Come forth, thou fearful man.
Affliction is enamoured of thy [part][1]s,
And thou art wedded to calamity.
_Enter Romeo_

[1]: {{page.q}}=12150 "part (n.) 1: quality, attribute, gift, accomplishment [of mind or body]"


**ROMEO**

Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom?
What sorrow [crave][2]s acquaintance at my hand
That I yet know not?

[2]: {{page.q}}=2863 "crave (v.) 2: need, demand, require"


**FRIAR**

Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company.
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.



**ROMEO**

What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?



**FRIAR**

A [gentle][3]r judgement vanished from his lips:
Not body's death, but body's banishment.

[3]: {{page.q}}=17496 "gentle (adj.) 2: courteous, friendly, kind"


**ROMEO**

Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say ‘ death.’
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death. Do not say ‘ banishment.’



**FRIAR**

Hence from Verona art thou banished.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.



**ROMEO**

There is no world [without][4] Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence banished is banished from the world,
And world's exile is death. Then ‘ banished ’
Is death mistermed. Calling death ‘ banished,’
Thou cuttest my head off with a golden axe
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

[4]: {{page.q}}=5794 "without (conj.) 3: outside"


**FRIAR**

O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death. But the kind Prince,
Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law,
And turned that black word ‘ death ’ to banishment.
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.



**ROMEO**

'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,
Where Juliet lives. And every cat and dog
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her.
But Romeo may not. More [validity][5],
More honourable state, more [courtship][6] lives
In [carrion][7] flies than Romeo. They may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who, even in pure and [vestal][8] modesty,
[Still][9] blush, as thinking their own kisses sin.
This may flies do, when I from this must fly.
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
But Romeo may not, he is banished.
Flies may do this but I from this must fly.
They are free men. But I am banished.
Hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden [mean][11] of death, though ne'er so mean,
But ‘ banished ’ to kill me – ‘ banished ’?
O Friar, the damned use that word in hell.
Howlings [attend][12]s it! How hast thou the heart,
Being a [divine][13], a [ghostly][14] confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my friend professed,
To mangle me with that word ‘ banished ’?

[5]: {{page.q}}=7315 "validity (n.) 1: value, worth, estimation"
[6]: {{page.q}}=2760 "courtship (n.): court life, courtliness; also: wooing, courting"
[7]: {{page.q}}=4247 "carrion (adj.) 2: preying on rotting flesh"
[8]: {{page.q}}=7458 "vestal (adj.) 2: virgin"
[9]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1: constantly, always, continually"
[10]: {{page.q}}=10516 "mean (adj.) 2: lowly, humble, poor"
[11]: {{page.q}}=10600 "mean (n.) 1: means, way, method"
[12]: {{page.q}}=76 "attend (v.) 4: accompany, follow closely, go with"
[13]: {{page.q}}=8589 "divine (n.) 1: clergyman, priest, parson"
[14]: {{page.q}}=17917 "ghostly (adj.): spiritual, holy"


**FRIAR**

Thou [fond][15] mad man, hear me a little speak.

[15]: {{page.q}}=19852 "fond (adj.) 1: foolish, stupid, mad"


**ROMEO**

O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.



**FRIAR**

I'll give thee armour to keep off that word –
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.



**ROMEO**

Yet ‘ banished ’? Hang up philosophy!
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
[Displant][16] a town, reverse a prince's doom,
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.

[16]: {{page.q}}=9312 "displant (v.): transplant, remove, displace"


**FRIAR**

O, then I see that madmen have no ears.



**ROMEO**

How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?



**FRIAR**

Let me [dispute][17] with thee of thy [estate][18].

[17]: {{page.q}}=8989 "dispute (v.) 1: discuss, consider, deal with [a state of affairs]"
[18]: {{page.q}}=9655 "estate (n.) 1: state, situation, circumstances"


**ROMEO**

Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak; then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
_Knock_



**FRIAR**

Arise. One knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.



**ROMEO**

Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans
Mist-like [infold][19] me from the search of eyes.
_Knock_

[19]: {{page.q}}=5293 "infold (v.): enfold, wrap up, conceal"


**FRIAR**

Hark, how they knock! – Who's there? – Romeo, arise.
Thou wilt be taken. – Stay awhile! – Stand up.
_Knock_
Run to my study. – By and by! – God's will,
What [simpleness][20] is this! – I come, I come!
_Knock_
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's your will?

[20]: {{page.q}}=15988 "simpleness (n.) 3: idiocy, stupidity, foolishness"


**NURSE**

Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
I come from Lady Juliet.



**FRIAR**

Welcome then.
_Enter Nurse_



**NURSE**

O holy Friar, O, tell me, holy Friar,
Where's my lady's lord, where's Romeo?



**FRIAR**

There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.



**NURSE**

O, he is even in my mistress' [case][21],
[Just][22] in her case! O woeful [sympathy][23]!
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
Why should you fall into so deep an [O][24]?
_He rises_

[21]: {{page.q}}=4136 "case (n.) 1: state, plight, situation, circumstance"
[22]: {{page.q}}=18893 "just (adv.) 1: exactly, precisely"
[23]: {{page.q}}=14697 "sympathy (n.) 1: accord, agreement, harmony"
[24]: {{page.q}}=12014 "O (n.) 4: sorrowful exclamation"


**ROMEO**

Nurse –



**NURSE**

Ah sir! ah sir! Death's the end of all.



**ROMEO**

Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Doth not she think me an [old][25] murderer,
Now I have stained the childhood of our joy
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? and how doth she? and what says
My [concealed][27] lady to our [cancelled][26] love?

[25]: {{page.q}}=11923 "old (adj.) 6: experienced, practised, skilled"
[26]: {{page.q}}=4068 "cancelled (adj.): made null and void, invalidated"
[27]: {{page.q}}=3779 "concealed (adj.) 1: unrevealed, kept secret, unacknowledged"


**NURSE**

O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls, and then [on][28] Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.

[28]: {{page.q}}=12018 "on (prep.) 1: against"


**ROMEO**

As if that name,
Shot from the deadly [level][29] of a gun,
Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand
Murdered her kinsman. O, tell me, Friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this [anatomy][30]
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may [sack][31]
The hateful mansion.

_He [offers][32] to stab himself, and the Nurse snatches the dagger away_

[29]: {{page.q}}=19634 "level (n.) 2: line of fire"
[30]: {{page.q}}=877 "anatomy (n.) 2: body, cadaver, corpse"
[31]: {{page.q}}=15989 "sack (v.): plunder, pillage, despoil"
[32]: {{page.q}}=11701 "offer (v.) 1: attempt, start, try, make a move"


**FRIAR**

Hold thy desperate hand.
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.
Thy tears are womanish. Thy wild acts denote
The [unreasonable][33] fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a [seeming][34] man!
And [ill-beseeming][35] beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order,
I thought thy [disposition][36] better [temper][37]ed.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why [rail][38]est thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Since birth and heaven and earth, all three, do meet
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy [wit][39],
Which, like a [usurer][40], aboundest in all,
And usest none in that [true][41] use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Thy noble shape is but a [form][42] of wax,
[Digress][43]ing from the valour of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
[Misshapen][45] in the [conduct][44] of them both,
Like [powder][47] in a skilless soldier's [flask][46]
Is set [afire][48] by thine own ignorance,
And thou [dismember][50]ed with thine own [defence][49].
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
There art thou [happy][51]. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy.
The law, that threatened death, becomes thy friend
And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.
A pack of blessings light upon thy back.
Happiness courts thee in her best array.
But, like a [mishaved][52] and sullen [wench][53],
Thou pouts upon thy [fortune][54] and thy love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love, as was [decree][55]d.
Ascend her chamber. Hence and comfort her.
But look thou stay not till the [Watch][56] be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To [blaze][57] your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou wentest forth in lamentation.
Go before, Nurse. [Commend][58] me to thy lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which [heavy][61] sorrow makes them [apt][59] unto.
Romeo is coming.

[33]: {{page.q}}=6966 "unreasonable (adj.): lacking the faculty of reason, irrational"
[34]: {{page.q}}=14562 "seeming (adj.): apparent, convincing in appearance"
[35]: {{page.q}}=5163 "ill-beseeming (adj.): unseemly, inappropriate, unbecoming"
[36]: {{page.q}}=8713 "disposition (n.) 2: natural temperament, normal state of mind"
[37]: {{page.q}}=5435 "temper (v.) 1: blend, mix, concoct, compound"
[38]: {{page.q}}=17089 "rail (v.): rant, rave, be abusive [about]"
[39]: {{page.q}}=7583 "wit (n.) 1: intelligence, wisdom, good sense, mental ability"
[40]: {{page.q}}=6851 "usurer (n.): money-lender, one who charges excessive interest"
[41]: {{page.q}}=5411 "true (adj.) 3: honourable, virtuous, sincere"
[42]: {{page.q}}=19870 "form (n.) 1: image, likeness, shape"
[43]: {{page.q}}=9313 "digress (v.): deviate, diverge, depart"
[44]: {{page.q}}=3213 "conduct (n.) 2: guidance, direction"
[45]: {{page.q}}=11109 "misshapen (adj.): gone awry, badly directed"
[46]: {{page.q}}=20606 "flask (n.): powder-flask, case for carrying gunpowder"
[47]: {{page.q}}=13447 "powder (n.): gunpowder"
[48]: {{page.q}}=329 "afire (adj.): on fire, burning"
[49]: {{page.q}}=9524 "defence (n.) 3: arms, armour, means of defence"
[50]: {{page.q}}=9314 "dismember (v.): blow to pieces, divide limb from limb"
[51]: {{page.q}}=18293 "happy (adj.) 1: fortunate, lucky, favoured"
[52]: {{page.q}}=11110 "mishaved (adj.): badly behaved"
[53]: {{page.q}}=7615 "wench (n.): girl, lass"
[54]: {{page.q}}=19927 "fortune (n.) 4: lucky chance, good luck"
[55]: {{page.q}}=9325 "decree (v.): arrange, decide, resolve"
[56]: {{page.q}}=7733 "watch (n.) 1: watchmen, officers, street patrol"
[57]: {{page.q}}=1747 "blaze, blaze forth (v.): proclaim, divulge, make known"
[58]: {{page.q}}=2672 "commend (v.) 1: convey greetings, present kind regards"
[59]: {{page.q}}=123 "apt (adj.) 4: likely, inclined, prone"
[60]: {{page.q}}=18156 "heavy (adj.) 2: grave, serious, weighty"
[61]: {{page.q}}=18220 "heavy (adj.) 1: sorrowful, sad, gloomy"


**NURSE**

O Lord, I could have stayed here all the night
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is! –
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.



**ROMEO**

Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to [chide][62].
_The Nurse begins to go in and turns back again_

[62]: {{page.q}}=4299 "chide (v.), past form chid 1: scold, rebuke, reprove"


**NURSE**

Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.
[Hie][63] you, make haste, for it grows very late.
_Exit Nurse_

[63]: {{page.q}}=18172 "hie (v.): hasten, hurry, speed"


**ROMEO**

How well my [comfort][64] is revived by this!

[64]: {{page.q}}=3780 "comfort (n.) 2: happiness, joy, cheerfulness"


**FRIAR**

Go hence. Good night. And here [stand][65]s all your [state][66]:
Either be gone before the Watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguised from hence.
[Sojourn][67] in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
And he shall [signify][68] from time to time
Every good [hap][69] to you that chances here.
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell. Good night.

[65]: {{page.q}}=15754 "stand (v.) 1: be, appear"
[66]: {{page.q}}=5904 "state (n.) 1: condition, circumstances, situation, state of affairs"
[67]: {{page.q}}=5910 "sojourn (v.) 1: pause, reside, stay for a while"
[68]: {{page.q}}=13997 "signify (v.): report, make known, declare"
[69]: {{page.q}}=18731 "hap (n.) 3: happening, event, occurrence"


**ROMEO**

But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief so [brief][70] to [part][71] with thee.
Farewell.
_Exeunt_

[70]: {{page.q}}=1748 "brief (adv.) 2: hurriedly, rapidly, in a rush"
[71]: {{page.q}}=12396 "part (v.) 1: depart [from], leave, quit"


