---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act III - Scene IV
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 17:43:11 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act3_scene4.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter old Capulet, his wife, and Paris_

**CAPULET**

Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to [move][1] our daughter.
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
'Tis very late. She'll not come down tonight.
I [promise][2] you, but for your company,
I would have been abed an hour ago.

[1]: {{page.q}}=11111 "move (v.) 5: persuade, influence, talk encouragingly to"
[2]: {{page.q}}=12498 "promise (v.) 1: assure, declare [to], tell plainly"


**PARIS**

These times of woe afford no times to woo.
Madam, good night. [Commend][3] me to your daughter.

[3]: {{page.q}}=2672 "commend (v.) 1: convey greetings, present kind regards"


**LADY CAPULET**

I will, and know her mind early tomorrow.
Tonight she's [mew][5]ed up to her [heaviness][4].
_Paris offers to go in and Capulet calls him again_

[4]: {{page.q}}=18276 "heaviness (n.) 1: sadness, grief, sorrow"
[5]: {{page.q}}=10947 "mew up (v.): coop up, confine, shut up"


**CAPULET**

Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child's love. I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me. Nay more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed.
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love,
And bid her – [mark][6] you me? – on Wednesday next –
But soft! what day is this?

[6]: {{page.q}}=10405 "mark (v.) 1: note, pay attention [to], take notice [of]"


**PARIS**

Monday, my lord.



**CAPULET**

Monday! Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
A' Thursday let it be. A' Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble [earl][7].
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
We'll keep no great [ado][8] – a friend or two.
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so [late][9],
It may be thought we held him [carelessly][10],
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

[7]: {{page.q}}=10226 "earl (n.): lord, peer, nobleman"
[8]: {{page.q}}=872 "ado (n.): fuss, business, to-do"
[9]: {{page.q}}=15363 "late (adv.): recently, a little while ago / before"
[10]: {{page.q}}=4069 "carelessly (adv.) 2: in little esteem, in low regard"


**PARIS**

My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.



**CAPULET**

Well, get you gone. A' Thursday be it, then.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed.
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Farewell, my lord. – Light to my chamber, ho!
Afore me, it is so very late that we
May call it early [by and by][11]. Good night.
_Exeunt

[11]: {{page.q}}=1950 "by and by (adv.) 2: shortly, soon, before long"


