---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act IV - Scene V
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 17:58:20 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act4_scene5.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Nurse goes to curtains_

**NURSE**

Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
Why, lamb! Why, lady! Fie, you [slug-a-bed][1]!
Why, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Why, bride!
What, not a word? You take your [pennyworth][2]s now.
Sleep for a week. For the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath [set][3] up his rest
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
Marry, and amen! How sound is she asleep!
I must needs wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed.
He'll [fright][4] you up, i'faith. Will it not be?
What, dressed, and in your clothes, and [down][5] again?
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!
O [weraday][6] that ever I was born!
Some [aqua vitae][7], ho! My lord! My lady!
_Enter Lady Capulet_

[1]: {{page.q}}=15994 "slug-abed (n.): lazy-bones"
[2]: {{page.q}}=13439 "pennyworth, penn'orth (n.) 4: small amount, little bit"
[3]: {{page.q}}=14583 "set up one's rest (n.): [in primero] venture one's final stake, stake all"
[4]: {{page.q}}=19973 "fright (v.), past form frighted: frighten, scare, terrify"
[5]: {{page.q}}=9316 "down (adv.) 2: in bed"
[6]: {{page.q}}=8128 "weraday (int.): well-a-day, alas"
[7]: {{page.q}}=273 "aqua-vitae (n.): spirits, alcohol, strong drink, brandy"


**LADY CAPULET**

What noise is here?



**NURSE**

O lamentable day!



**LADY CAPULET**

What is the matter?

**NURSE**

Look, look! O [heavy][8] day!

[8]: {{page.q}}=18220 "heavy (adj.) 1: sorrowful, sad, gloomy"

**LADY CAPULET**

O me, O me! My child, my only life!
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Help, help! Call help.
_Enter Capulet_



**CAPULET**

For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.



**NURSE**

She's dead, deceased. She's dead, alack the day!



**LADY CAPULET**

Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!



**CAPULET**

Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,
Her blood is [settled][9], and her joints are stiff.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an [untimely][10] frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

[9]: {{page.q}}=15995 "settled (adj.) 5: not flowing, still, congealed"
[10]: {{page.q}}=6742 "untimely (adj.): premature, coming before its time"


**NURSE**

O lamentable day!



**LADY CAPULET**

O woeful time!



**CAPULET**

Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
_Enter Friar Laurence and the County Paris_



**FRIAR**

Come, is the bride ready to go to church?



**CAPULET**

Ready to go, but never to return.
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Hath death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law. Death is my heir.
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
And leave him all. Life, living, all is death's.



**PARIS**

Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?



**LADY CAPULET**

Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In [lasting][11] labour of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and [solace][12] in,
And cruel death hath [catch][13]ed it from my sight.

[11]: {{page.q}}=19636 "lasting (adj.): unceasing, ongoing, everlasting"
[12]: {{page.q}}=14837 "solace (v.) 1: take comfort, be happy, cheer [oneself]"
[13]: {{page.q}}=4161 "catch (v.) 1: seize, get hold of, capture"


**NURSE**

O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day!
Most lamentable day, most woeful day
That ever, ever I did yet behold!
O day, O day, O day! O hateful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this.
O woeful day! O woeful day!



**PARIS**

[Beguile][14]d, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Most detestable Death, by thee beguiled,
By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown.
O love! O life! – not life, but love in death!

[14]: {{page.q}}=1438 "beguile (v.) 1: cheat, deceive, trick"


**CAPULET**

Despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed!
[Uncomfortable][15] time, why camest thou now
To murder, murder our [solemnity][16]?
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
Dead art thou – alack, my child is dead,
And with my child my joys are buried.

[15]: {{page.q}}=7077 "uncomfortable (adj.) 1: comfortless, inconsolable, heartbreaking"
[16]: {{page.q}}=14718 "solemnity (n.) 1: celebration, jubilation, festivity"


**FRIAR**

Peace, ho, for shame! [Confusion][17]'s cure lives not
In these [confusion][18]s. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her [promotion][19],
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced.
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
She's not well married that lives married long,
But she's best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair [corse][20], and, as the custom is,
In all her best array bear her to church.
For though [fond][21] nature bids us all lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.

[17]: {{page.q}}=3783 "confusion (n.) 2: calamity, disaster, catastrophe"
[18]: {{page.q}}=3786 "confusion (n.) 4: outburst, disorder, commotion"
[19]: {{page.q}}=13440 "promotion (n.): advancement in life, social betterment"
[20]: {{page.q}}=2740 "corse (n.): corpse, dead body"
[21]: {{page.q}}=20177 "fond (adj.) 3: tender, loving, affectionate"


**CAPULET**

All things that we ordained festival
Turn from their [office][22] to black funeral.
Our instruments to melancholy bells;
Our wedding [cheer][23] to a [sad][24] burial feast;
Our solemn hymns to [sullen][26] [dirge][25]s change;
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried [corse][27];
And all things change them to the contrary.

[22]: {{page.q}}=11646 "office (n.) 2: role, position, place, function"
[23]: {{page.q}}=4356 "cheer (n.) 1: entertainment, fare, food and drink"
[24]: {{page.q}}=15557 "sad (adj.) 3: downcast, distressed, mournful, gloomy"
[25]: {{page.q}}=8523 "dirge (n.): funeral song, song of mourning"
[26]: {{page.q}}=14610 "sullen (adj.) 1: gloomy, dismal, melancholy, mournful"
[27]: {{page.q}}=2740 "corse (n.): corpse, dead body"


**FRIAR**

Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare
To follow this fair [corse][28] unto her grave.
The heavens do [lour][30] upon you for some [ill][29].
[Move][31] them no more by crossing their high will.
_Exeunt all except the Nurse, casting_
_rosemary on her and shutting the curtains_
_Enter Musicians_

[28]: {{page.q}}=2740 "corse (n.): corpse, dead body"
[29]: {{page.q}}=4938 "ill (n.) 1: wrong, injury, harm, evil"
[30]: {{page.q}}=19272 "lour, lower (v.): frown, scowl, look dark and threatening"
[31]: {{page.q}}=10634 "move (v.) 2: move to anger, provoke, exasperate"


**FIRST MUSICIAN**

Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.



**NURSE**

Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
For well you know this is a pitiful [case][32].

[32]: {{page.q}}=4136 "case (n.) 1: state, plight, situation, circumstance"


**FIDDLER**

Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
_Exit Nurse_
_Enter Peter_



**PETER**

Musicians, O musicians, ‘ Heart's ease,’ ‘ Heart's
ease ’! O, an you will have me live, play ‘ Heart's ease.’



**FIRST MUSICIAN**

Why ‘ Heart's ease ’?



**PETER**

O musicians, because my heart itself plays ‘ My
heart is full.’ O play me some merry [dump][33] to comfort
me.

[33]: {{page.q}}=9599 "dump (n.) 2: tune, melody"


**FIRST MUSICIAN**

Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play
now.



**PETER**

You will not then?



**FIRST MUSICIAN**

No.



**PETER**

I will then give it you [soundly][34].

[34]: {{page.q}}=15996 "soundly (adv.) 2: thoroughly, properly, in full"


**FIRST MUSICIAN**

What will you give us?



**PETER**

No money, on my faith, but the [gleek][36]. I will [give][35]
you the [minstrel][37].

[35]: {{page.q}}=18050 "give (v.) 8: call, nickname"
[36]: {{page.q}}=17645 "gleek (n.): taunt, gibe, insult"
[37]: {{page.q}}=11114 "minstrel (n.): [derisive term for] musician"


**FIRST MUSICIAN**

Then I will [give][38] you the
[serving-creature][39].

[38]: {{page.q}}=18050 "give (v.) 8: call, nickname"
[39]: {{page.q}}=15997 "serving-creature (n.): [derisive term for] serving-man"


**PETER**

Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
your [pate][42]. I will [carry][40] no [crotchet][41]s. I'll re you, I'll fa you.
Do you note me?

[40]: {{page.q}}=4245 "carry (v.) 4: endure, put up with"
[41]: {{page.q}}=3160 "crotchet (n.): strange notion, perverse idea, whimsical fancy"
[42]: {{page.q}}=12608 "pate (n.): head, skull"


**FIRST MUSICIAN**

An you re us and fa us, you [note][43] us.

[43]: {{page.q}}=11320 "note (v.) 1: observe, pay attention [to], take special note [of]"


**SECOND MUSICIAN**

Pray you put up your dagger, and
[put][44] out your [wit][45].

[44]: {{page.q}}=13442 "put out (v.) 2: display, exhibit, show forth"
[45]: {{page.q}}=7645 "wit (n.) 2: mental sharpness, acumen, quickness, ingenuity"


**PETER**

Then have at you with my wit! I will [dry-beat][46] you
with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me
like men.
‘ When griping grief the heart doth wound,
And doleful [dump][47]s the mind oppress,
Then music with her silver sound ’ –
Why ‘ silver sound ’? Why ‘ music with her silver sound ’?
What say you, Simon Catling?

[46]: {{page.q}}=9310 "dry-beat (v.): cudgel, thrash, beat soundly"
[47]: {{page.q}}=9155 "dump (n.) 1: plaintive melody, mournful song"


**FIRST MUSICIAN**

Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet
sound.



**PETER**

Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?



**SECOND MUSICIAN**

I say ‘ silver sound ’ because musicians
sound for silver.



**PETER**

Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?



**THIRD MUSICIAN**

Faith, I know not what to say.



**PETER**

O, I cry you mercy! You are the singer. I will say
for you. It is ‘ music with her silver sound ’ because musicians
have no gold for [sounding][48].
‘ Then music with her silver sound
With speedy help doth lend [redress][51].’
_Exit Peter_

[48]: {{page.q}}=15998 "sounding (n.) 1: playing, making music"
[51]: {{page.q}}=16674 "redress (n.) 1: relief, assistance, help, comfort"


**FIRST MUSICIAN**

What a pestilent [knave][49] is this same!

[49]: {{page.q}}=18989 "knave (n.) 1: scoundrel, rascal, rogue"


**SECOND MUSICIAN**

Hang him, [Jack][50]! Come, we'll in here,
[tarry][52] for the mourners, and stay dinner.
_Exeunt_

[50]: {{page.q}}=18880 "Jack (n.) 1: Jack-in-office, ill-mannered fellow, lout, knave"
[52]: {{page.q}}=5567 "tarry (v.) 1: stay, remain, linger"


