---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act IV - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 17:51:31 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act4_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Capulet, Lady  Capulet, Nurse, and two or three_

_Servingmen_

**CAPULET**

So many guests invite as here are writ.
_Exit a Servingman_
Sirrah, go hire me twenty [cunning][1] cooks.

[1]: {{page.q}}=2789 "cunning (adj.) 1: knowledgeable, skilful, clever"


**SERVINGMAN**

You shall have none [ill][2], sir. For I'll [try][3] if
they can lick their fingers.

[2]: {{page.q}}=4905 "ill (adj.) 3: poor, inadequate, miserable"
[3]: {{page.q}}=6307 "try (v.) 1: prove, ascertain, find out"


**CAPULET**

How! Canst thou try them so?



**SERVINGMAN**

Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick
his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers
goes not with me.



**CAPULET**

Go, begone.
_Exit Servingman_
We shall be much [unfurnished][4] for this time.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?

[4]: {{page.q}}=7076 "unfurnished (adj.) 1: unprepared, unready"


**NURSE**

Ay, [forsooth][5].

[5]: {{page.q}}=20059 "forsooth (adv.): in truth, certainly, truly, indeed"


**CAPULET**

Well, he may chance to do some good on her.
A [peevish][7] self-willed [harlotry][6] it is.
_Enter Juliet_

[6]: {{page.q}}=18352 "harlotry (n.) 2: [affectionate] little wretch, baggage"
[7]: {{page.q}}=13294 "peevish (adj.) 2: obstinate, perverse, self-willed [contrast modern sense of ‘irritable, morose’]"


**NURSE**

See where she comes from shrift with merry look.



**CAPULET**

How now, my headstrong! Where have you been gadding?



**JULIET**

Where I have learned me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your [behest][8]s, and am enjoined
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

[8]: {{page.q}}=1474 "behest (n.): command, bidding, decree"


**CAPULET**

Send for the [County][9]. Go tell him of this.
I'll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.

[9]: {{page.q}}=3568 "county (n.) 1: [title of rank] count"


**JULIET**

I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
And gave him what [becomed][10] love I might,
Not step o'er the bounds of modesty.

[10]: {{page.q}}=1750 "becomed (adj.): becoming, befitting, appropriate"


**CAPULET**

Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up.
This is as't should be. Let me see, the County.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Now, afore God, this reverend holy Friar,
All our whole city is much [bound][11] to him.

[11]: {{page.q}}=1897 "bound (adj.) 1: obliged, indebted, under an obligation"


**JULIET**

Nurse, will you go with me into my [closet][12]
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to [furnish][13] me tomorrow?

[12]: {{page.q}}=2649 "closet (n.) 1: private chamber, study, own room"
[13]: {{page.q}}=19897 "furnish (v.) 3: dress, clothe, equip, fit out"


**LADY CAPULET**

No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.



**CAPULET**

Go, Nurse, go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.
_Exeunt Juliet and Nurse_



**LADY CAPULET**

We shall be short in our provision.
'Tis now near night.



**CAPULET**

Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I [warrant][14] thee, wife.
Go thou to Juliet, help to [deck][15] up her.
I'll not to bed tonight. Let me alone.
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to [prepare][16] up him
Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous [light][17],
Since this same wayward girl is so [reclaim][18]ed.
_Exeunt_

[14]: {{page.q}}=7550 "warrant (v.) 1: assure, promise, guarantee, confirm"
[15]: {{page.q}}=9320 "deck up (v.): array, attire, adorn"
[16]: {{page.q}}=13437 "prepare up (v.): prepare, put in readiness"
[17]: {{page.q}}=19279 "light (adj.) 2: joyful, merry, light-hearted"
[18]: {{page.q}}=17117 "reclaim (v.) 1: subdue, tame, make obedient"


