---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act IV - Scene IV
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 17:55:14 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act4_scene4.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse, with herbs_

**LADY CAPULET**

Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, Nurse.



**NURSE**

They call for dates and quinces in the [pastry][1].
_Enter Capulet_

[1]: {{page.q}}=13438 "pastry (n.): pastry-making part of the kitchen"


**CAPULET**

Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed.
The curfew bell hath rung. 'Tis three o'clock.
Look to the [baked][2] meats, good Angelica.
Spare not for [cost][3].

[2]: {{page.q}}=1752 "baked meats (n.): pies, pastries"
[3]: {{page.q}}=2876 "cost (n.) 1: outlay, expense, expenditure"


**NURSE**

Go, you [cot-quean][4], go.
Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick tomorrow
For this night's [watching][5].

[4]: {{page.q}}=3782 "cot-quean (n.): man acting the housewife, meddler in household affairs"
[5]: {{page.q}}=7768 "watching (n.): wakefulness, sleeplessness, vigilance"


**CAPULET**

No, not a whit. What! I have [watch][6]ed ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

[6]: {{page.q}}=7558 "watch (v.) 1: stay awake, keep vigil"


**LADY CAPULET**

Ay, you have been a [mouse-hunt][7] in your time.
But I will watch you from such watching now.
_Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse_

[7]: {{page.q}}=11113 "mouse-hunt (n.): mouse-hunter; prowler, pursuer of women"


**CAPULET**

A [jealous][9] [hood][8], a jealous hood!
_Enter three or four Servingmen with spits and logs and baskets_
Now, fellow,
What is there?

[8]: {{page.q}}=18719 "hood (n.): [unclear meaning] head-covering, bonnet"
[9]: {{page.q}}=18964 "jealous-hood (n.): [unclear meaning] state of being jealous"


**FIRST SERVINGMAN**

Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.



**CAPULET**

Make haste, make haste.
_Exit First Servingman_
Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.



**SECOND SERVINGMAN**

I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
And never trouble Peter for the matter.



**CAPULET**

Mass! and well said. A merry [whoreson][10], ha!
Thou shalt be loggerhead.
_Exit Second Servingman_
Good Father! 'tis day.
The [County][11] will be here with music [straight][12],
For so he said he would.
_Music plays_
I hear him near.
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!
_Enter Nurse_
Go waken Juliet. Go and trim her up.
I'll go and chat with Paris. [Hie][13], make haste,
Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already.
Make haste, I say.
_Exit Capulet_

[10]: {{page.q}}=7804 "whoreson (n.): [son of a whore; serious or jocular term of abuse] fellow, bastard"
[11]: {{page.q}}=3568 "county (n.) 1: [title of rank] count"
[12]: {{page.q}}=14086 "straight (adv.): straightaway, immediately, at once"
[13]: {{page.q}}=18172 "hie (v.): hasten, hurry, speed"


