---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act IV - Scene III
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 17:53:27 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act4_scene3.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Juliet and Nurse_

**JULIET**

Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle Nurse,
I pray thee leave me to myself tonight.
For I have need of many [orison][1]s
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou knowest, is [cross][2] and full of sin.
_Enter Lady Capulet_

[1]: {{page.q}}=11626 "orison (n.): prayer, plea"
[2]: {{page.q}}=3439 "cross (adj.) 1: perverse, contrarious, contradictory"


**LADY CAPULET**

What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?



**JULIET**

No, madam. We have [cull][3]ed such necessaries
As are [behoveful][4] for our [state][5] tomorrow.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the Nurse this night sit up with you.
For I am sure you have your hands full all
In this so sudden business.

[3]: {{page.q}}=3492 "cull (v.): select, pick out, choose"
[4]: {{page.q}}=1751 "behoveful, behoofeful (adj.): needful, necessary, useful"
[5]: {{page.q}}=15993 "state (n.) 5: ceremony, celebration"


**LADY CAPULET**

Good night.
Go thee to bed, and rest. For thou hast need.
_Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse_



**JULIET**

Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a [faint][6] cold fear [thrill][7]s through my veins
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
I'll call them back again to comfort me.
Nurse! – What should she do here?
My [dismal][8] scene I needs must act alone.
Come, [vial][9].
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
No, no! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
_She lays down a knife_
What if it be a poison which the Friar
[Subtly][10] hath ministered to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonoured
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is. And yet [methinks][11] it should not,
For he hath [still][12] been [tried][13] a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very [like][14]
The horrible [conceit][15] of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place –
As in a vault, an ancient [receptacle][16]
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packed;
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but [green][17] in earth,
Lies [fester][18]ing in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort –
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking – what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like [mandrake][19]s torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad –
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
[Environ][20]ed with all these hideous fears,
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud,
And, in this [rage][21], with some great kinsman's bone
As with a club dash out my desperate brains?
O, look! [Methinks][22] I see my cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
Upon a rapier's point. [Stay][23], Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo.
Here's drink. I drink to thee.
_She falls upon her bed within the curtains_

[6]: {{page.q}}=20525 "faint (adj.) 2: faint-hearted, timorous, fearful"
[7]: {{page.q}}=6438 "thrill (v.) 2: pass like a shiver, tremble"
[8]: {{page.q}}=8434 "dismal (adj.) 1: disastrous, calamitous, devastating"
[9]: {{page.q}}=7220 "vial (n.): phial, small bottle, flask"
[10]: {{page.q}}=16530 "subtly, subtilly (adv.): deceitfully, treacherously, deceptively"
[11]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.): it seems /seemed to me"
[12]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1: constantly, always, continually"
[13]: {{page.q}}=6307 "try (v.) 1: prove, ascertain, find out"
[14]: {{page.q}}=19137 "like (adv.) 1: likely, probable / probably"
[15]: {{page.q}}=2695 "conceit (n.) 2: imagining, brooding, fanciful thinking"
[16]: {{page.q}}=17385 "receptacle (n.): repository, storehouse, receiving-chamber"
[17]: {{page.q}}=17526 "green (adj.) 1: fresh, recent, new"
[18]: {{page.q}}=20609 "fester (v.): corrupt, putrify, rot"
[19]: {{page.q}}=10915 "mandrake (n.) 1: variety of poisonous plant [thought to emit a lethal shriek when pulled from the ground]"
[20]: {{page.q}}=9800 "environ (v.): surround, envelop, encircle, engulf"
[21]: {{page.q}}=16881 "rage (n.) 4: madness, insanity, derangement"
[22]: {{page.q}}=10439 "methinks(t), methought(s) (v.): it seems /seemed to me"
[23]: {{page.q}}=14169 "stay (v.) 9: stop, halt, come to a standstill"


