---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act IV - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 17:49:37 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act4_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Friar Laurence and County Paris_

**FRIAR**

On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.



**PARIS**

My father Capulet will have it so,
And I am nothing [slow][2] to [slack][1] his haste.

[1]: {{page.q}}=15992 "slack (v.) 1: slacken, reduce, slow down"
[2]: {{page.q}}=14013 "slow (adj.) 2: reluctant, unwilling, slowly given"


**FRIAR**

You say you do not know the lady's mind.
[Uneven][4] is the [course][3]. I like it not.

[3]: {{page.q}}=3134 "course (n.) 1: course of action, way of proceeding"
[4]: {{page.q}}=7075 "uneven (adj.): irregular, erratic"


**PARIS**

Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
And therefore have I little talked of love;
For Venus smiles not in a [house][5] of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much [sway][6],
And in his wisdom [haste][7]s our marriage
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much [mind][8]ed by herself alone,
May be put from her by [society][9].
Now do you know the reason of this haste.

[5]: {{page.q}}=18723 "house (n.) 5: [astrology] heavenly domain [one of twelve divisions of the heavens]"
[6]: {{page.q}}=5923 "sway (n.) 1: power, dominion, rule"
[7]: {{page.q}}=18687 "haste (v.): hurry, speed up, accelerate"
[8]: {{page.q}}=10537 "mind (v.) 3: think of, call to mind"
[9]: {{page.q}}=14227 "society (n.) 1: companionship, fellowship, association"


**FRIAR**

_(aside)_
I would I knew not why it should be slowed. –
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
_Enter Juliet_



**PARIS**

Happily met, my lady and my wife!



**JULIET**

That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.



**PARIS**

That ‘ may be ’ must be, love, on Thursday next.



**JULIET**

What must be shall be.



**FRIAR**

That's a certain text.



**PARIS**

Come you to make confession to this father?



**JULIET**

To answer that, I should confess to you.



**PARIS**

Do not deny to him that you love me.



**JULIET**

I will confess to you that I love him.



**PARIS**

So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.



**JULIET**

If I do so, it will be of more [price][10],
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.

[10]: {{page.q}}=12391 "price (n.): value, worth, importance"


**PARIS**

Poor soul, thy face is much [abuse][11]d with tears.

[11]: {{page.q}}=879 "abuse (v.) 2: misuse, maltreat, treat badly, wrong"


**JULIET**

The tears have got small victory by that,
For it was bad enough before their [spite][12].

[12]: {{page.q}}=15568 "spite (n.) 2: malice, ill-will, hatred"


**PARIS**

Thou wrongest it more than tears with that report.



**JULIET**

That is no slander, sir, which is a truth.
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.



**PARIS**

Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.



**JULIET**

It may be so, for it is not mine own. –
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Or shall I come to you at evening [mass][13]?

[13]: {{page.q}}=11112 "mass (n.) 2: service, liturgy, divine celebration"


**FRIAR**

My leisure [serve][15]s me, [pensive][14] daughter, now. –
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

[14]: {{page.q}}=13436 "pensive (adj.): sorrowful, sad, full of melancholy"
[15]: {{page.q}}=15563 "serve (v.) 3: provide opportunity [to], be favourable [to], favour"


**PARIS**

God [shield][16] I should disturb devotion! –
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.
_Exit Paris_

[16]: {{page.q}}=15756 "shield (v.): forbid [as exclamation]"


**JULIET**

O shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me. Past hope, past cure, past help!



**FRIAR**

Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief.
It strains me past the [compass][17] of my [wits][18].
I hear thou must, and nothing may [prorogue][19] it,
On Thursday next be married to this [County][20].

[17]: {{page.q}}=2681 "compass (n.) 1: range, reach, limit, scope"
[18]: {{page.q}}=8049 "wits, also five wits: faculties of the mind (common wit, imagination, fantasy, estimation, memory) or body (the five senses)"
[19]: {{page.q}}=12325 "prorogue (v.) 1: postpone, delay, defer"
[20]: {{page.q}}=3568 "county (n.) 1: [title of rank] count"


**JULIET**

Tell me not, Friar, that thou hearest of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise
And with this knife I'll help it [presently][21].
God joined my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's sealed,
Shall be the [label][22] to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous [revolt][23]
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Therefore, out of thy long-experienced [time][24],
Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
'Twixt my [extreme][25]s and me this bloody knife
Shall play the [umpire][26], arbitrating that
Which the [commission][28] of thy years and [art][27]
Could to no [issue][29] of true honour bring.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
If what thou speakest speak not of remedy.

[21]: {{page.q}}=12248 "presently (adv.) 1: immediately, instantly, at once"
[22]: {{page.q}}=19635 "label (n.) 2: codicil, appendix, additional clause"
[23]: {{page.q}}=17010 "revolt (n.) 1: betrayal, change of heart, faithlessness"
[24]: {{page.q}}=5604 "time (n.) 3: lifetime, life"
[25]: {{page.q}}=9725 "extreme (n.) 4: intense emotion, violent passion"
[26]: {{page.q}}=6711 "umpire (n.): arbitrator, mediator, adjudicator"
[27]: {{page.q}}=610 "art (n.) 1: knowledge, learning, scholarship, science"
[28]: {{page.q}}=2675 "commission (n.) 1: warrant, authority [to act]"
[29]: {{page.q}}=5208 "issue (n.) 2: outcome, result, consequence(s)"


**FRIAR**

Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
Which [crave][30]s as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to [chide][31] away this [shame][32],
That [cope][33]st with death himself to '[scape][34] from it.
And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.

[30]: {{page.q}}=2863 "crave (v.) 2: need, demand, require"
[31]: {{page.q}}=4464 "chide (v.), past form chid 4: brusquely command, drive [away] with harsh words"
[32]: {{page.q}}=14605 "shame (n.) 1: disgrace, dishonour, affront"
[33]: {{page.q}}=2807 "cope, cope with (v.) 1: encounter, face, have to do [with], come into contact [with]"
[34]: {{page.q}}=14263 "scape, 'scape (v.): escape, avoid"


**JULIET**

O bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of any tower,
Or walk in [thievish][35] ways, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears,
Or hide me nightly in a [charnel house][36],
[O'ercovered][37] [quite][38] with dead men's rattling bones,
With [reeky][40] [shank][41]s and yellow [chapless][39] skulls.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his tomb –
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble –
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.

[35]: {{page.q}}=6437 "thievish (adj.): frequented by thieves, infested with robbers"
[36]: {{page.q}}=4413 "charnel-house, charnel house (n.): bone-store, burial vault"
[37]: {{page.q}}=12019 "overcover (v.): cover up, bury"
[38]: {{page.q}}=13766 "quite (adv.): totally, completely, entirely"
[39]: {{page.q}}=4304 "chapless, chopless (adj.): jawless"
[40]: {{page.q}}=17317 "reeky  (adj.): foul-smelling, smoky"
[41]: {{page.q}}=16008 "shank (n.) 2: shin-bone"


**FRIAR**

Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent
To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow.
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone.
Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Take thou this [vial][42], being then in bed,
And this [distilling][43] liquor drink thou off;
When [presently][44] through all thy veins shall run
A cold and [drowsy][45] [humour][46]. For no pulse
Shall keep his [native][47] progress, but [surcease][48].
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest.
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To [wanny][49] ashes, thy eyes' [window][50]s fall
Like death when he shuts up the day of life.
Each part, deprived of supple [government][51],
Shall, stiff and [stark][52] and cold, appear like death.
And in this [borrowed][53] likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Then, as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the meantime, [against][54] thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our [drift][55].
And hither shall he come. And he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant [toy][56] nor womanish fear
Abate thy valour in the acting it.

[42]: {{page.q}}=7220 "vial (n.): phial, small bottle, flask"
[43]: {{page.q}}=9319 "distilling (adj.): infusing, penetrative, permeating the body"
[44]: {{page.q}}=12248 "presently (adv.) 1: immediately, instantly, at once"
[45]: {{page.q}}=9060 "drowsy (adj.): causing sleepiness, sleep-inducing, soporific"
[46]: {{page.q}}=18357 "humour (n.) 5: secretion, fluid, juice"
[47]: {{page.q}}=11534 "native (adj.) 1: natural, habitual, normal"
[48]: {{page.q}}=14503 "surcease (v.): cease, stop, leave off"
[49]: {{page.q}}=8126 "wanny (adj.): wan, pallid, pale"
[50]: {{page.q}}=7845 "window (n.) 2: (plural) eyelids"
[51]: {{page.q}}=17639 "government (n.) 1: control, charge, management"
[52]: {{page.q}}=14924 "stark (adj.): rigid, stiff [as in death]"
[53]: {{page.q}}=2265 "borrowed (adj.): assumed, pretended, feigned"
[54]: {{page.q}}=889 "against, 'gainst (conj.): in anticipation of the time when"
[55]: {{page.q}}=8478 "drift (n.) 1: plan, intention, aim"
[56]: {{page.q}}=5477 "toy (n.) 1: whim, caprice, trifling matter"


**JULIET**

Give me, give me! O tell not me of fear!



**FRIAR**

Hold. Get you gone. Be strong and [prosperous][57]
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

[57]: {{page.q}}=12566 "prosperous (adj.) 2: favourable, happy, showing success"


**JULIET**

Love give me strength, and strength shall help afford.
Farewell, dear father!
_Exeunt_



