---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act V - Scene II
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 18:05:58 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act5_scene2.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Friar John_

**FRIAR JOHN**

Holy Franciscan Friar, brother, ho!
_Enter Friar Laurence_



**FRIAR**

This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Or, if his [mind][1] be writ, give me his letter.

[1]: {{page.q}}=10588 "mind (n.) 2: intention, purpose, intent"


**JOHN**

Going to find a bare-foot brother out,
One of our order, to [associate][2] me
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the [searcher][3]s of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Sealed up the doors, and would not let us forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was [stay][4]ed.

[2]: {{page.q}}=892 "associate (v.): accompany, escort, join with"
[3]: {{page.q}}=16001 "searcher (n.): official appointed to view and report on corpses"
[4]: {{page.q}}=15545 "stay (v.) 8: stop, prevent, end"


**LAURENCE**

Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?



**JOHN**

I could not send it – here it is again –
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.



**LAURENCE**

Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
The letter was not [nice][6], but full of [charge][5],
Of [dear][7] [import][8]; and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence.
Get me an iron [crow][9] and bring it [straight][10]
Unto my cell.

[5]: {{page.q}}=4290 "charge (n.) 9: weight, import, moment"
[6]: {{page.q}}=11439 "nice (adj.) 5: trivial, unimportant, slight"
[7]: {{page.q}}=8884 "dear (adj.) 2: important, major, significant"
[8]: {{page.q}}=4929 "import (n.): importance, significance, consequence"
[9]: {{page.q}}=2997 "crow (n.) 1: crowbar"
[10]: {{page.q}}=14086 "straight (adv.): straightaway, immediately, at once"


**JOHN**

Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.
_Exit Friar John_



**LAURENCE**

Now must I to the monument alone.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
She will [beshrew][11] me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these [accident][12]s.
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.
Poor living [corse][13], closed in a dead man's tomb!
_Exit_

[11]: {{page.q}}=1754 "beshrew, 'shrew (v.) 2: blame, censure, take to task, wish mischief on"
[12]: {{page.q}}=710 "accident (n.) 1: occurrence, event, happening"
[13]: {{page.q}}=2740 "corse (n.): corpse, dead body"


