---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act V - Scene I
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 18:04:36 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act5_scene1.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Romeo_

**ROMEO**

If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams [presage][1] some joyful news at hand.
My [bosom][2]'s lord sits lightly in his throne,
And all this day an [unaccustomed][3] spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead –
Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think! –
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips
That I revived and was an emperor.
Ah me! how sweet is love itself [possess][4]ed,
When but love's [shadow][5]s are so rich in joy!
_Enter Balthasar, Romeo's man, booted_
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the Friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How [fare][6]s my Juliet? That I ask again,
For nothing can be ill if she be well.

[1]: {{page.q}}=13187 "presage (v.) 2: predict, forecast"
[2]: {{page.q}}=2300 "bosom (n.) 1: heart, inner person"
[3]: {{page.q}}=6747 "unaccustomed (adj.): unusual, strange, unfamiliar"
[4]: {{page.q}}=12727 "possess (v.) 2: fill, imbue"
[5]: {{page.q}}=15593 "shadow (n.) 4: illusion, unreal image, delusion"
[6]: {{page.q}}=19984 "fare (v.) 1: get on, manage, do, cope"


**BALTHASAR**

Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
And [presently][9] took [post][8] to tell it you.
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my [office][10], sir.

[7]: {{page.q}}=12610 "post (n.) 1: express messenger, courier"
[8]: {{page.q}}=13382 "post (n.) 2: post-horse"
[9]: {{page.q}}=12248 "presently (adv.) 1: immediately, instantly, at once"
[10]: {{page.q}}=11936 "office (n.) 1: task, service, duty, responsibility"


**ROMEO**

Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars!
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper,
And hire [posthorses][11]. I will hence tonight.

[11]: {{page.q}}=13443 "post-horse (n.) 1: fast horse"


**BALTHASAR**

I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
Your looks are pale and wild and do [import][12]
Some [misadventure][13].

[12]: {{page.q}}=4927 "import (v.) 4: portend, signify, predict"
[13]: {{page.q}}=11115 "misadventure (n.): misfortune, mishap, tragic accident"


**ROMEO**

Tush, thou art deceived.
Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the Friar?



**BALTHASAR**

No, my good lord.



**ROMEO**

No matter. Get thee gone
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee [straight][14].
_Exit Balthasar_
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
Let's [see][16] for means. O [mischief][15], thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men.
I do remember an [apothecary][17],
And hereabouts 'a dwells, which [late][18] I [note][19]d
In tattered [weed][22]s, with [overwhelming][21] [brow][20]s,
[Cull][23]ing of [simple][24]s. Meagre were his looks.
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones.
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuffed, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
A [beggarly][26] [account][25] of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, [bladder][27]s, and musty seeds,
Remnants of [packthread][29], and old [cake][28]s of roses
Were thinly scattered, to make up a [show][30].
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
‘ An if a man did need a poison now
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a [caitiff][31] wretch would sell it him.’
O, this same thought did but [forerun][32] my [need][33],
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
What, ho! Apothecary!
_Enter Apothecary_

[14]: {{page.q}}=14086 "straight (adv.): straightaway, immediately, at once"
[15]: {{page.q}}=10384 "mischief (n.) 2: wicked action, evil deed, harmful scheme"
[16]: {{page.q}}=16404 "see for (v.): look out for"
[17]: {{page.q}}=363 "apothecary, pothecary  (n.): one who prepares and sells medicinal drugs"
[18]: {{page.q}}=15363 "late (adv.): recently, a little while ago / before"
[19]: {{page.q}}=11320 "note (v.) 1: observe, pay attention [to], take special note [of]"
[20]: {{page.q}}=1915 "brow (n.) 3: eyebrow"
[21]: {{page.q}}=12016 "overwhelming (adj.): overhanging, bulging, protruding"
[22]: {{page.q}}=7564 "weed (n.) 1: (plural) garments, dress, clothes"
[23]: {{page.q}}=3492 "cull (v.): select, pick out, choose"
[24]: {{page.q}}=13999 "simple (n.) 1: ingredient, element, constituent"
[25]: {{page.q}}=890 "account, accompt (n.) 4: number, collection, assortment"
[26]: {{page.q}}=1645 "beggarly (adj.) 1: destitute, impoverished, poverty-stricken"
[27]: {{page.q}}=1753 "bladder (n.) 1: vessel derived from animals used for storing liquid"
[28]: {{page.q}}=4072 "cake (n.): compressed pack, flattened bundle"
[29]: {{page.q}}=13448 "packthread, pack-thread (n.): twine used for tying up bundles, string"
[30]: {{page.q}}=15093 "show (n.) 1: appearance, exhibition, display"
[31]: {{page.q}}=3986 "caitiff (adj.): wretched, miserable, worthless"
[32]: {{page.q}}=20174 "forerun (v.): forecast, foreshadow, be the precursor of"
[33]: {{page.q}}=11425 "need (n.): time of necessity, needy situation, emergency"


**APOTHECARY**

Who calls so loud?



**ROMEO**

Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
A [dram][34] of poison, such [soon-speeding][36] [gear][35]
As will disperse itself through all the veins,
That the life-weary taker may fall dead
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
As violently as hasty [powder][37] fired
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.

[34]: {{page.q}}=8471 "dram (n.) 1: tiny amount, small quantity"
[35]: {{page.q}}=18053 "gear (n.) 3: stuff, substance"
[36]: {{page.q}}=15999 "soon-speeding (adj.): quick-acting, rapidly working"
[37]: {{page.q}}=13447 "powder (n.): gunpowder"


**APOTHECARY**

Such [mortal][38] drugs I have. But Mantua's law
Is death to any [he][39] that [utter][40]s them.

[38]: {{page.q}}=10654 "mortal (adj.) 1: fatal, deadly, lethal"
[39]: {{page.q}}=18597 "he (n.): man, person"
[40]: {{page.q}}=7078 "utter (v.) 2: offer for sale, dispense, make available"


**ROMEO**

Art thou so [bare][41] and full of wretchedness
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks.
Need and oppression [starve][42]th in thy eyes.
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law.
The world affords no law to make thee rich.
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.

[41]: {{page.q}}=2551 "bare (adj.) 4: gaunt, lean, needy"
[42]: {{page.q}}=16000 "starve (v.) 4: show hunger, reflect starvation"


**APOTHECARY**

My poverty but not my will consents.



**ROMEO**

I pay thy poverty and not thy will.



**APOTHECARY**

Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
Of twenty men it would [dispatch][43] you [straight][44].

[43]: {{page.q}}=8580 "dispatch, despatch (v.) 3: kill, put to death, make away with, finish off"
[44]: {{page.q}}=14086 "straight (adv.): straightaway, immediately, at once"


**ROMEO**

There is thy gold – worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world,
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
I sell thee poison. Thou hast sold me none.
Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.
Come, [cordial][45] and not poison, go with me
To Juliet's grave. For there must I use thee.
_Exeunt_

[45]: {{page.q}}=3302 "cordial (n.): restorative, stimulant, tonic"


