---
title: Romeo and Juliet
tagline: Act V - Scene III
category: play
author: shakespeare
date: 2014-05-26 18:06:27 +0800
permalink: /books/shakespeare/Romeo_and_Juliet_act5_scene3.html
layout: book_page
creation: 1594-1595
type: comedy
q: http://www.shakespeareswords.com/Headwords-Instance.aspx?Ref
---

_Enter Paris and his Page, with flowers and sweet water_

**PARIS**

Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew trees lay thee all [along][1],
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground.
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
Being loose, [unfirm][2], with digging up of graves,
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
As signal that thou hearest something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

[1]: {{page.q}}=985 "along (adv.): at full length, stretched out, prostrate"
[2]: {{page.q}}=7079 "unfirm (adj.) 3: unstable, not compact, of loose consistency"


**PAGE**

_(aside)_
I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the churchyard. Yet I will [adventure][3].
_Page [retires][4]_

[3]: {{page.q}}=873 "adventure (v.): venture, dare, chance, risk"
[4]: {{page.q}}=17318 "retire (v.) 1: withdraw, take oneself away"


**PARIS**

Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew –
O woe! thy [canopy][5] is dust and stones –
Which with [sweet][7] water nightly I will [dew][6];
Or, [want][9]ing that, with tears [distil][8]led by moans.
The [obsequies][11] that I for thee will [keep][10]
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
_Page whistles_
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way tonight
To [cross][12] my [obsequies][13] and true love's rite?
What, with a torch! Muffle me, night, awhile.
_Paris retires_
_Enter Romeo and Balthasar, with a torch, a mattock,_
_and a [crow][15] of iron_

[5]: {{page.q}}=4073 "canopy (n.) 2: covering above a bed"
[6]: {{page.q}}=8960 "dew (v.): bedew, moisten, water"
[7]: {{page.q}}=15000 "sweet (adj.) 1: perfumed, scented, fragrant"
[8]: {{page.q}}=9415 "distil (v.) 2: trickle down, fall in tiny drops"
[9]: {{page.q}}=7539 "want (v.) 1: lack, need, be without"
[10]: {{page.q}}=19037 "keep (v.) 4: keep up, maintain, carry on"
[11]: {{page.q}}=11822 "obsequy (n.): funeral rite, burial ceremony"
[12]: {{page.q}}=2829 "cross (v.) 1: prevent, thwart, forestall"
[13]: {{page.q}}=11822 "obsequy (n.): funeral rite, burial ceremony"
[14]: {{page.q}}=17318 "retire (v.) 1: withdraw, take oneself away"
[15]: {{page.q}}=2997 "crow (n.) 1: crowbar"


**ROMEO**

Give me that [mattock][17] and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all [aloof][18]
And do not interrupt me in my [course][19].
Why I descend into this bed of death
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In [dear][20] employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
But if thou, [jealous][21], dost return to pry
In what I farther shall intend to do,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
The time and my [intent][22]s are savage-wild,
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

[16]: {{page.q}}=11116 "mattock (n.): tool for loosening hard ground"
[17]: {{page.q}}=11116 "mattock (n.): tool for loosening hard ground"
[18]: {{page.q}}=131 "aloof (adv.): a short distance away, to one side"
[19]: {{page.q}}=3134 "course (n.) 1: course of action, way of proceeding"
[20]: {{page.q}}=8884 "dear (adj.) 2: important, major, significant"
[21]: {{page.q}}=18903 "jealous (adj.) 1: suspicious, mistrustful, wary, watchful"
[22]: {{page.q}}=5207 "intent (n.): intention, purpose, aim"


**BALTHASAR**

I will be gone, sir, and not trouble ye.



**ROMEO**

So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.



**BALTHASAR**

_(aside)_
For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
His looks I fear, and his [intent][24]s I [doubt][23].
_Balthasar retires_

[23]: {{page.q}}=8465 "doubt (v.) 2: suspect, have suspicions about, fear"
[24]: {{page.q}}=5207 "intent (n.): intention, purpose, aim"


**ROMEO**

Thou detestable [maw][25], thou [womb][26] of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And in [despite][27] I'll cram thee with more food.
_Romeo begins to open the tomb_

[25]: {{page.q}}=10624 "maw (n.): belly, stomach; throat, gullet"
[26]: {{page.q}}=8109 "womb (n.): belly, paunch"
[27]: {{page.q}}=8628 "despite (n.) 2: malice, spite, hatred"


**PARIS**

This is that banished haughty Montague
That murdered my love's cousin – with which grief
It is supposed the fair creature died –
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies. I will [apprehend][28] him.
_Comes forward_
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Obey, and go with me. For thou must die.

[28]: {{page.q}}=332 "apprehend (v.) 1: seize, arrest, lay hold of"


**ROMEO**

I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Good [gentle][29] youth, tempt not a desperate man.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone.
Let them [affright][30] thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head
By urging me to fury. O, be gone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
For I come hither armed against myself.
Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.

[29]: {{page.q}}=17496 "gentle (adj.) 2: courteous, friendly, kind"
[30]: {{page.q}}=158 "affright (v.): frighten, terrify, scare"


**PARIS**

I do defy thy [conjuration][31]
And apprehend thee for a felon here.

[31]: {{page.q}}=2713 "conjuration (n.) 1: entreaty, injunction, solemn appeal"


**ROMEO**

Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
_They fight_



**PAGE**

O Lord, they fight! I will go call the Watch.
_Exit Page_
_Paris falls_



**PARIS**

O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.
_Paris dies_



**ROMEO**

In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man when my [betossed][32] soul
Did not [attend][33] him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book.
I'll bury thee in a [triumphant][34] grave.
A grave? O, no, a [lantern][35], slaughtered youth.
_He opens the tomb_
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a [feasting][36] [presence][37] full of light.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred.
_He lays him in the tomb_
How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry! which their [keeper][38]s call
A lightning before death. O, how may I
Call this a lightning? O my love, my wife!
Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no [power][39] yet upon thy beauty.
Thou art not conquered. Beauty's [ensign][40] yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not [advance][41]d there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favour can I do to thee
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To [sunder][42] his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his [paramour][43]?
For fear of that I [still][44] will stay with thee
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O here
Will I [set][45] up my everlasting rest
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A [dateless][46] bargain to [engrossing][47] death!
Come, bitter [conduct][48], come, unsavoury guide!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy [seasick][50] weary [bark][49]!
_Here's to my love! (He drinks) O true Apothecary!_
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
_He falls_
_Enter Frair Laurence, with lantern, crow, and spade_

[32]: {{page.q}}=1755 "betossed (adj.): tossed about, shaken up"
[33]: {{page.q}}=77 "attend (v.) 7: listen [to], pay attention [to]"
[34]: {{page.q}}=6173 "triumphant (adj.): triumphal, glorious, celebrating a great victory"
[35]: {{page.q}}=19637 "lantern (n.): light-filled arena, brilliantly lit place"
[36]: {{page.q}}=20611 "feasting (adj.): jubilant, sumptuous, festive"
[37]: {{page.q}}=12688 "presence (n.) 2: royal reception chamber"
[38]: {{page.q}}=19067 "keeper (n.) 2: nurse, carer"
[39]: {{page.q}}=12912 "power (n.) 7: control, influence, sway"
[40]: {{page.q}}=9970 "ensign (n.) 1: standard, banner, flag"
[41]: {{page.q}}=326 "advance (v.) 2: display, present, promote"
[42]: {{page.q}}=16009 "sunder (v.) 2: cut, divide, put an end to"
[43]: {{page.q}}=12488 "paramour (n.) 1: lover"
[44]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1: constantly, always, continually"
[45]: {{page.q}}=14583 "set up one's rest (n.): [in primero] venture one's final stake, stake all"
[46]: {{page.q}}=9321 "dateless (adj.): everlasting, eternal, endless"
[47]: {{page.q}}=10227 "engrossing (adj.): all-absorbing, monopolizing"
[48]: {{page.q}}=3367 "conduct (n.) 3: conductor, leader, director"
[49]: {{page.q}}=1410 "bark, barque (n.): ship, vessel"
[50]: {{page.q}}=16397 "seasick (adj.): weary of sea travel, tired of voyaging,"


**FRIAR**

Saint Francis be my [speed][51]! How [oft][52] tonight
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?

[51]: {{page.q}}=16002 "speed (n.) 2: assistance, aid, protector"
[52]: {{page.q}}=11606 "oft (adv.): often"


**BALTHASAR**

Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.



**FRIAR**

Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond that [vainly][53] lends his light
To [grub][54]s and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
It burneth in the Capel's monument.

[53]: {{page.q}}=7461 "vainly (adv.) 1: uselessly, fruitlessly, ineffectively"
[54]: {{page.q}}=18054 "grub (n.): maggot, worm"


**BALTHASAR**

It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
One that you love.



**FRIAR**

Who is it?



**BALTHASAR**

Romeo.



**FRIAR**

How long hath he been there?



**BALTHASAR**

Full half an hour.



**FRIAR**

Go with me to the vault.



**BALTHASAR**

I dare not, sir.
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death
If I did stay to look on his [intent][55]s.

[55]: {{page.q}}=5207 "intent (n.): intention, purpose, aim"


**FRIAR**

Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
O much I fear some ill [unthrifty][56] thing.

[56]: {{page.q}}=7081 "unthrifty (adj.) 3: harmful, pernicious, unfortunate"


**BALTHASAR**

As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.



**FRIAR**

Romeo!
_He stoops and looks on the blood and weapons_
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these [masterless][57] and gory swords
To lie discoloured by this place of peace?
_He enters the tomb_
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
And steeped in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
The lady stirs.
_Juliet rises_

[57]: {{page.q}}=11117 "masterless (adj.): abandoned, lacking an owner"


**JULIET**

O comfortable Friar! Where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?



**FRIAR**

I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Of death, [contagion][58], and [unnatural][59] sleep.
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our [intent][60]s. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Stay not to question, for the [Watch][61] is coming.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.

[58]: {{page.q}}=4762 "contagion (n.) 2: poison"
[59]: {{page.q}}=6834 "unnatural (adj.) 2: abnormal, monstrous, aberrant"
[60]: {{page.q}}=5207 "intent (n.): intention, purpose, aim"
[61]: {{page.q}}=7733 "watch (n.) 1: watchmen, officers, street patrol"


**JULIET**

Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
_Exit Friar_
What's here? A cup, closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his [timeless][62] end.
O [churl][63]! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
[Haply][64] some poison yet doth hang on them
To make die with a restorative.
_She kisses him_
Thy lips are warm!

[62]: {{page.q}}=5608 "timeless (adj.): untimely, premature, ill-timed"
[63]: {{page.q}}=4637 "churl (n.) 3: [term of endearment] wretch, miser, villain"
[64]: {{page.q}}=15270 "haply (adv.): perhaps, maybe, by chance, with luck"


**WATCHMAN**

_(within)_
Lead, boy. Which way?



**JULIET**

Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O [happy][65] dagger!
_She snatches Romeo's dagger_
This is thy sheath; there rust, and let me die.
_She stabs herself and falls_
_Enter Paris's Page and the Watch_

[65]: {{page.q}}=15273 "happy (adj.) 2: opportune, appropriate, propitious, favourable"


**PAGE**

This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.



**FIRST WATCHMAN**

The ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
Go, some of you. Whoe'er you find [attach][66].
_Exeunt some of the Watch_
Pitiful sight! Here lies the [County][67] slain!
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain these two days buried.
Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets.
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
_Exeunt others of the Watch_
We see the ground whereon these [woe][68]s do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without [circumstance][69] [descry][70].
_Enter some of the Watch, with Balthasar_

[66]: {{page.q}}=233 "attach (v.) 1: arrest, seize, apprehend"
[67]: {{page.q}}=3568 "county (n.) 1: [title of rank] count"
[68]: {{page.q}}=8129 "woe (n.): pitiable creature, mournful sight"
[69]: {{page.q}}=2638 "circumstance (n.) 1: detail(s), particular(s), specifics"
[70]: {{page.q}}=9322 "descry (v.) 2: find out, detect, discover"


**SECOND WATCHMAN**

Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.



**FIRST WATCHMAN**

Hold him in [safety][71] till the Prince come hither.
_Enter Friar Laurence and another of the Watch_

[71]: {{page.q}}=16087 "safety (n.) 2: safe keeping, custody"


**THIRD WATCHMAN**

Here is a Friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
We took this [mattock][72] and this spade from him
As he was coming from this churchyard's side.

[72]: {{page.q}}=11116 "mattock (n.): tool for loosening hard ground"


**FIRST WATCHMAN**

A great suspicion! [Stay][73] the Friar too.
_Enter the Prince and attendants_

[73]: {{page.q}}=14066 "stay (v.) 7: detain, confine, keep"


**PRINCE**

What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our morning rest?
_Enter Capulet and his wife with others_



**CAPULET**

What should it be, that is so shrieked abroad?



**LADY CAPULET**

O the people in the street cry ‘ Romeo,’
Some ‘ Juliet,’ and some ‘ Paris ’; and all run
With open outcry toward our monument.



**PRINCE**

What fear is this which startles in your ears?



**FIRST WATCHMAN**

Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new killed.



**PRINCE**

Search, seek, and know, how this foul murder comes.



**FIRST WATCHMAN**

Here is a Friar, and slaughtered Romeo's man,
With instruments upon them fit to open
These dead men's tombs.



**CAPULET**

O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath [mista'en][75], for, lo, his [house][74]
Is empty on the back of Montague,
And it [mis-sheathe][76]d in my daughter's bosom!

[74]: {{page.q}}=18720 "house (n.) 6: housing, sheath, place of rest"
[75]: {{page.q}}=11118 "mistake (v.) 2: act in error, perform the wrong action"
[76]: {{page.q}}=11119 "mis-sheathe (v.): sheathe wrongly"


**LADY CAPULET**

O me! This sight of death is as a bell
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
_Enter Montague and others_



**PRINCE**

Come, Montague. For thou art early up
To see thy son and heir now early [down][77].

[77]: {{page.q}}=9323 "down (adv.) 1: dead on the ground"


**MONTAGUE**

Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight!
Grief of my son's exile hath stopped her breath.
What further woe conspires against mine age?



**PRINCE**

Look, and thou shalt see.



**MONTAGUE**

O thou [untaught][78]! what manners is in this,
To press before thy father to a grave?

[78]: {{page.q}}=7084 "untaught (adj.) 1: uninstructed, uneducated, uncultivated"


**PRINCE**

Seal up the [mouth][79] of [outrage][80] for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities
And know their spring, their head, their true descent.
And then will I be [general][81] of your woes
And lead you, even to death. Meantime [forbear][82],
And let [mischance][83] be slave to patience.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

[79]: {{page.q}}=11120 "mouth (n.) 1: utterance, expression, voice"
[80]: {{page.q}}=11901 "outrage (n.) 2: passionate expression, emotional outcry"
[81]: {{page.q}}=18051 "general (n.) 2: leader, chief"
[82]: {{page.q}}=19856 "forbear (v.) 1: stop, cease, desist"
[83]: {{page.q}}=10451 "mischance (n.): misfortune, calamity, mishap"


**FRIAR**

I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth [make][85] against me, of this [direful][84] murder.
And here I stand, both to [impeach][86] and [purge][87]
Myself condemned and myself excused.

[84]: {{page.q}}=8903 "direful (adj.): dreadful, terrible, frightful"
[85]: {{page.q}}=10967 "make (v.) 4: prove effective, be of avail"
[86]: {{page.q}}=5021 "impeach (v.) 1: accuse, charge, challenge"
[87]: {{page.q}}=13444 "purge (v.) 3: clear, excuse, exonerate"


**PRINCE**

Then say at once what thou dost know in this.



**FRIAR**

I will be brief, for my short [date][89] of [breath][88]
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
I married them; and their [stolen][90] marriage day
Was Tybalt's [doomsday][91], whose [untimely][92] death
Banished the new-made bridegroom from this city;
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
You, to remove that [siege][93] of grief from her,
Betrothed and would have married her [perforce][94]
To County Paris. Then comes she to me
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my [cell][95] there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her – so tutored by my [art][96] –
A sleeping potion; which so took effect
As I intended, for it [wrought][97] on her
The [form][98] of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
That he should hither come [as][99] this dire night
To help to take her from her [borrowed][100] grave,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was [stay][101]ed by accident and [yesternight][102]
Returned my letter back. Then all alone
At the [prefixed][103] hour of her waking
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
Meaning to keep her [closely][105] at my [cell][104]
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awakening, here [untimely][106] lay
The noble Paris and [true][107] Romeo dead.
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
And bear this work of heaven with patience.
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know; and to the marriage
Her nurse is [privy][109]; and if [aught][108] in this
[Miscarried][114] by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificed, some hour before his time,
Unto the rigour of severest law.

[88]: {{page.q}}=2255 "breath (n.) 4: life, spirit, living and breathing existence"
[89]: {{page.q}}=8807 "date (n.) 1: duration, period of existence"
[90]: {{page.q}}=16010 "stolen (adj.): secret, stealthy, clandestine"
[91]: {{page.q}}=9114 "doomsday (n.): death-day, day of judgement"
[92]: {{page.q}}=6742 "untimely (adj.): premature, coming before its time"
[93]: {{page.q}}=16003 "siege (n.) 1: onslaught, storm, assail"
[94]: {{page.q}}=12178 "perforce (adv.) 1: forcibly, by force, violently"
[95]: {{page.q}}=4172 "cell (n.): small humble dwelling"
[96]: {{page.q}}=610 "art (n.) 1: knowledge, learning, scholarship, science"
[97]: {{page.q}}=7728 "work (v.), past form wrought 1: bring about, arrange, effect"
[98]: {{page.q}}=19871 "form (n.) 8: physical appearance, outward appearance"
[99]: {{page.q}}=893 "as (prep.): on"
[100]: {{page.q}}=2265 "borrowed (adj.): assumed, pretended, feigned"
[101]: {{page.q}}=15545 "stay (v.) 8: stop, prevent, end"
[102]: {{page.q}}=8279 "yesternight (n.): last night"
[103]: {{page.q}}=12822 "prefixed (adj.): fixed, settled, prearranged, decided in advance"
[104]: {{page.q}}=4172 "cell (n.): small humble dwelling"
[105]: {{page.q}}=2648 "closely (adv.) 1: secretly, covertly, privately"
[106]: {{page.q}}=6719 "untimely (adv.) 1: prematurely, too soon, before due time"
[107]: {{page.q}}=5497 "true (adj.) 2: constant, faithful in love"
[108]: {{page.q}}=84 "aught (n.): anything, [with negative word] nothing"
[109]: {{page.q}}=12256 "privy 1: privately aware [of], secretly knowledgeable [about]"
[110]: {{page.q}}=10635 "miscarry (v.) 3: go wrong, fail, be unsuccessful"


**PRINCE**

We [still][111] have known thee for a holy man.
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say to this?

[111]: {{page.q}}=14077 "still (adv.) 1: constantly, always, continually"


**BALTHASAR**

I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
And then in [post][112] he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
I departed not and left him there.

[112]: {{page.q}}=12529 "post, in: in haste, at top speed"


**PRINCE**

Give me the letter. I will look on it.
Where is the [County][113]'s page that raised the Watch?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

[113]: {{page.q}}=3568 "county (n.) 1: [title of rank] count"
[114]: {{page.q}}=10395 "make (v.) 1: do, have to do"


**PAGE**

He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave,
And bid me stand [aloof][115], and so I did.
[Anon][116] comes one with light to [ope][117] the tomb,
And [by and by][118] my master drew on him.
And then I ran away to call the Watch.

[115]: {{page.q}}=131 "aloof (adv.): a short distance away, to one side"
[116]: {{page.q}}=30 "anon (adv.) 1: soon, shortly, presently"
[117]: {{page.q}}=11610 "ope (v.): open"
[118]: {{page.q}}=1833 "by and by (adv.) 1: immediately, straightaway, directly"


**PRINCE**

This letter doth make good the Friar's words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death.
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor [pothecary][119], and therewithal
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montague,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
And I, for [wink][120]ing at your discords too,
Have lost a [brace][121] of kinsmen. All are punished.

[119]: {{page.q}}=363 "apothecary, pothecary  (n.): one who prepares and sells medicinal drugs"
[120]: {{page.q}}=7633 "wink (v.) 1: shut one's eyes"
[121]: {{page.q}}=1951 "brace (n.) 1: group of two, couple, pair"


**CAPULET**

O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
This is my daughter's [jointure][122], for no more
Can I demand.

[122]: {{page.q}}=18852 "jointure (n.): marriage settlement, part of a husband's estate due to his widow"


**MONTAGUE**

But I can give thee more.
For I will raise her statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no [figure][123] at such [rate][124] be [set][125]
As that of [true][126] and faithful Juliet.

[123]: {{page.q}}=20387 "figure (n.) 5: portrayal, rendering, presentation"
[124]: {{page.q}}=17319 "rate (n.) 4: worth, value, merit"
[125]: {{page.q}}=13970 "set (v.) 1: value, rate, esteem"
[126]: {{page.q}}=5497 "true (adj.) 2: constant, faithful in love"


**CAPULET**

As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!



**PRINCE**

A [glooming][127] peace this morning with it brings.
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Go hence, to have more talk of these [sad][128] things.
Some shall be pardoned, and some punished:
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
_Exeunt_

[127]: {{page.q}}=18055 "glooming (adj.): gloomy, dark, dismal"
[128]: {{page.q}}=15557 "sad (adj.) 3: downcast, distressed, mournful, gloomy"


