---
title: Chapter 5. Aggression
book: 
  title: on human nature
  author: Edward O. Wilson
category: human_nature
permalink: /books/on_human_nature/05_Aggression.html
date: 2014-04-11 16:24:00 +0800
layout: book_page 
---

Are human beings innately aggressive? This is a favorite question of college seminars and cocktail party conversations, and one that raises emotion in political ideologues of all stripes. The answer to it is yes. Throughout history, warfare, representing only the most organized technique of aggression, has been endemic to every form of society, from hunter-gatherer bands to industrial states. During the past three centuries a majority of the countries of Europe have been engaged in war during approximately half of all the years; few have ever seen a century of continuous peace. Virtually all societies have invented elaborate sanctions against rape, extortion, and murder, while regulating their daily commerce through complex customs and laws designed to minimize the subtler but inevitable forms of conflict. Most significantly of all, the human forms of aggressive behavior are species-specific: although basically primate in form, they contain features that distinguish them from aggression in all other species. Only by redefining the words “innateness” and “aggression” to the point of uselessness might we correctly say that human aggressiveness is not innate.

Theoreticians who wish to exonerate the genes and blame human aggressiveness wholly on perversities of the environment point to
the tiny minority of societies that appear to be nearly or entirely pacific. They forget that innateness refers to the measurable probability that a trait will develop in a specified set of environments, not to the certainty that the trait will develop in all environments. By this criterion human beings have a marked hereditary predisposition to aggressive behavior. In fact, the matter is even more clear-cut than this qualification implies. The most peaceable tribes of today were often the ravagers of yesteryear and will probably again produce soldiers and murderers in the future. Among contemporary !Kung San violence in adults is almost unknown; Elizabeth Marshall Thomas has correctly named them the “harmless people.” But as recently as fifty years ago, when these “Bushman” populations were denser and less rigidly controlled by the central government, their homicide rate per capita equalled that of Detroit and Houston. The Semai of Malaya have shown an even greater plasticity. Most of the time they seem to be innocent of even the concept of violent aggression, Murder is unknown, no explicit word for kill exists (“hit” is the preferred euphemism), children are not struck, and chickens are beheaded only as a much regretted necessity. Parents carefully train their children in these habits of nonviolence. When Semai men were recruited by the British colonial government to join in the campaign against Communist guerillas in the early 1950s, they were simply unaware that soldiers are supposed to fight and kill. “Many people who knew the Semai insisted that such an un-warlike people could never make good soldiers,” writes the American anthropologist Robert K. Dentan. But they were proved wrong:



> Communist terrorists had killed the kinsmen of some of the Semai counterinsurgency troops. Taken out of their nonviolent society and ordered to kill, they seem to have been swept up in a sort of insanity which they call “blood drunkenness.” A typical veteran’s story runs like this. “We killed, killed, killed.
The Malays would stop and go through people’s pockets and take their watches and money. We did not think of watches or money. We thought only of killing. Wah, truly we were drunk with blood.” One man even told how he had drunk the blood of a man he had killed.



Like most other mammals, human beings display a behavioral scale, a spectrum of responses that appear or disappear according to particular circumstances. They differ genetically from many other animal species that lack such a pattern of behavior altogether. Because there is a complex scale instead of a simple, reflex-like response, psychoanalysts and zoologists alike have had an extraordinarily difficult time arriving at a satisfactory general characterization of human aggression. They would encounter exactly the same difficulty defining gorilla aggression or tiger aggression. Freud interpreted the behavior in human beings as the outcome of a drive that constantly seeks release. Konrad Lorenz, in his book On Aggression, modernized this view with new data from the studies of animal behavior. He concluded that human beings share a general instinct for aggressive behavior with other animal species. This drive must somehow be relieved, if only through competitive sports. Erich Fromm, in *The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness*, took a different and still more pessimistic view that man is subject to a unique death instinct that commonly leads to pathological forms of aggression beyond those encountered in animals.

Both of these interpretations are essentially wrong. Like so many other forms of behavior and “instinct,” aggression in any given species is actually an ill-defined array of different responses with separate controls in the nervous system. No fewer than seven categories can be distinguished: the defense and conquest of territory, the assertion of dominance within well-organized groups, sexual aggression, acts of hostility by which weaning is terminated, aggression
against prey, defensive counterattacks against predators, and moralistic and disciplinary aggression used to enforce the rules of society. Rattlesnakes provide an instructive example of the distinctions between these basic categories. When two males compete for access to females, they intertwine their necks and wrestle as though testing each other’s strength, but they do not bite, even though their venom is as lethal to other rattlesnakes as it is to rabbits and mice. When a rattlesnake stalks its prey it strikes from any number of positions without advance warning. But when the tables are turned and the snake is confronted by an animal large enough to threaten its safety, it coils, pulls its head forward to the center of the coil in striking position, and raises and shakes its rattle. Finally, if the intruder is a king snake, a species specialized for feeding on other snakes, the rattlesnake employs a wholly different maneuver: it coils, hides its head under its body, and slaps at the king snake with one of the raised coils. So to understand the aggression of rattlesnakes or human beings it is necessary to specify which of the particular forms of aggressive behavior is of interest.

Continuing research in zoology has also established that none of the categories of aggressive behavior exists in the form of a general instinct over broad arrays of species. Each category can be added, modified, or erased by an individual species during the course of its genetic evolution, in the same way that eye color can be altered from one shade to another or a particular skin gland added or eliminated. When natural selection is intense, these changes can occur throughout an entire population in only a few generations. Aggressive behavior is in fact one of the genetically most labile of all traits. We commonly find that one species of bird or mammal is highly territorial, with every square meter of habitable environment carefully staked out; the residents perform spectacular dances or emit loud cries and noisome odors to repel rivals of the same species from their private little domains. Yet coexisting in the same habitats may be a
second, otherwise similar species that shows no trace of territorial behavior. Equally abrupt differences among species commonly occur in the other categories of aggression. In short, there is no evidence that a widespread unitary aggressive instinct exists.

The reason for the absence of a general aggressive instinct has been revealed by research in ecology. Most kinds of aggressive behavior among members of the same species are responsive to crowding in the environment. Animals use aggression as a technique for gaining control over necessities, ordinarily food or shelter, that are scarce or are likely to become so at some time during the life cycle. They intensify their threats and attack with increasing frequency as the population around them grows denser. As a result the behavior itself induces members of the population to spread out in space, raises the death rate, and lowers the birth rate. In such cases aggression is said to be a “density-dependent factor” in controlling population growth. As it gradually increases in intensity, it operates like a tightening valve to slow and finally shut off the increase in numbers. Other species, in contrast, seldom or never run short of the basic necessities of life. Their numbers are reduced instead by the density-dependent effects of predators, parasites, or emigration. Such animals are typically pacific toward each other, because they rarely grow numerous enough for aggressive behavior to be of any use to individuals. And if aggression confers no advantage, it is unlikely to be encoded through natural selection into the innate behavioral repertory of the species.

Journalists following the lead of Lorenz and Fromm have in the past depicted humankind as bloodthirsty beyond the explanatory powers of science. Yet this too is wrong. Although markedly predisposed to aggressiveness, we are far from being the most violent animal. Recent studies of hyenas, lions, and langur monkeys, to take three familiar species, have disclosed that individuals engage in lethal lighting, infanticide, and even cannibalism at a rate far above that
found in human societies. When a count is made of the number of murders committed per thousand individuals per year, human beings are well down on the list of violently aggressive creatures, and I am confident that this would still be the case even if our episodic wars were to be averaged in. Hyena packs even clash in deadly pitched battles that are virtually indistinguishable from primitive human warfare. Here is an account by Hans Kruuk, a zoologist at Oxford University, of a dispute over a newly killed wildebeest:


> The two groups mixed with an uproar of calls, but within seconds the sides parted again and the Mungi hyenas ran away, briefly pursued by the Scratching Rock hyenas, who then returned to the carcass. About a dozen of the Scratching Rock hyenas, though, grabbed one of the Mungi males and bit him wherever they could—especially in the belly, the feet and the ears. The victim was completely covered by his attackers, who proceeded to maul him for about io minutes while their clan fellows were eating the wildebeest. The Mungi male was literally pulled apart, and when I later studied the injuries more closely, it appeared that his ears were bitten off and so were his feet and testicles, he was paralyzed by a spinal injury, had large gashes in the hind legs and belly, and subcutaneous hemorrhages all over . . , The next morning, I found a hyena eating from the carcass and saw evidence that more had been there; about one-third of the internal organs and muscles had been eaten. Cannibals!



Comparable episodes are becoming commonplace in the annals of the natural history of other kinds of mammals. 1 suspect that if hamadryas baboons had nuclear weapons, they would destroy the world in a week. And alongside ants, which conduct assassinations, skirmishes, and pitched battles as routine business, men are all but tranquilized pacifists. For those who wish to confirm this statement
directly, ant wars are very easy to observe in most towns and cities in the eastern United States. One simply looks for masses of small blackish brown ants struggling together on sidewalks or lawns. The combatants are members of rival colonies of the common pavement ant, *Tetramorium caespitum*. Thousands of individuals may be involved, and the battlefield typically occupies several square feet of the grassroots jungle.

Finally, the more violent forms of human aggression are not the manifestations of inborn drives that periodically break through dams of inhibition. The “drive-discharge” model created by Freud and Lorenz has been replaced by a more subtle explanation based on the interaction of genetic potential and learning. The most persuasive single piece of evidence for the latter, “culture-pattern” model has been provided by Richard G. Sipes, an anthropologist. Sipes noted that if aggression is a quantity in the brain that builds up and is released, as suggested by the drive-discharge model, then it can take the form of either war or the most obvious substitutes of war, including combative sports, malevolent witchcraft, tatooing and other ritualized forms of body mutilation, and the harsh treatment of deviates. As a consequence, warlike activities should result in a reduction of its lesser substitutes. If, in contrast, violent aggression is the realization of a potential that is enhanced by learning, an increase in the practice of war should be accompanied by an increase in the substitutes. By comparing the qualities of ten notably warlike societies with those of ten pacific societies, Sipes found that the culture-pattern model is upheld over the rival drive-discharge hypothesis: the practice of war is accompanied by a greater development of combatant sports and other lesser forms of violent aggression.

The clear perception of human aggressive behavior as a structured, predictable pattern of interaction between genes and environment is consistent with evolutionary theory. It should satisfy both camps in the venerable nature-nurture controversy. On the one hand
it is true that aggressive behavior, especially in its more dangerous forms of military action and criminal assault, is learned. But the learning is prepared, in the sense explained in Chapter 3; we are strongly predisposed to slide into deep, irrational hostility under certain definable conditions. With dangerous ease hostility feeds on itself and ignites runaway reactions that can swiftly progress to alienation and violence. Aggression does not resemble a fluid that continuously builds pressure against the walls of its containers, nor is it like a set of active ingredients poured into an empty vessel. It is more accurately compared to a preexisting mix of chemicals ready to be transformed by specific catalysts that are added, heated, and stirred at some later time.

The products of this neural chemistry are aggressive responses that are distinctively human. Suppose that we could enumerate all of the possible kinds of actions in all species. In this imaginary example, there might be exactly twenty-three such responses, which could be labeled A through W. Human beings do not and cannot manifest every behavior; perhaps all of the societies in the world taken together employ A through P. Furthermore, they do not develop each of the options with equal facility; there is a strong tendency under all existing conditions of child rearing for behaviors A through G to appear, and consequently H through P are encountered in very few cultures. It is the pattern of such probabilities that is inherited. We say that for each environment there is a corresponding probability distribution of responses. To make the statistical characterization entirely meaningful, we must then go on to compare human beings with other species. We note that rhesus monkeys can perhaps develop only aggressive behaviors F through J, with a strong bias toward F and G, while one kind of termite can show only A and another kind of termite only B. Which behavior particular human beings display depends on what they experience within their own culture, but the total array of human possibilities,
like the monkey array or termite array, is inherited. It is the evolution of each pattern that sociobiologists attempt to analyze.

Territoriality is one of the variants of aggressive behavior that can be directly evaluated by the new insights of biology. Students of animal behavior define a territory as an area occupied more or less exclusively either directly by overt defense or indirectly through advertisement. This area invariably contains a scarce resource, usually a steady food supply, shelter, space for sexual display, or a site for laying eggs. Often the limitation on the availability of the resource to competing individuals secondarily affects population growth to the extent of also serving as a density-dependent factor, so that territorial defense intervenes as a buffering device against long-term changes in the environment. In other words, territoriality prevents the population from either exploding or crashing. Close studies by zoologists of the daily schedules, feeding behavior, and energy expenditures of individual animals have revealed that territorial behavior evolves in animal species only when the vital resource is *economically defensible*: the energy saved and the increase in survival and reproduction due to territorial defense outweigh the energy expended and the risk of injury and death. The researchers have been able to go further in some instances to prove that in the case of food territories the size of the defended area is at or just above the size required to yield enough food to keep the resident healthy and able to reproduce. Finally, territories contain an “invincible center.” The resident animal defends the territory far more vigorously than intruders attempt to usurp it, and as a result the defender usually wins. In a special sense, it has the “moral advantage” over trespassers.

The study of territorial behavior in human beings is in a very early stage. We know that bands of hunter-gatherers around the world are commonly aggressive in their defense of land that contains a reliable food resource. The Guayaki Indians of Paraguay
jealously guard their hunting grounds and regard trespassing as the equivalent of a declaration of war. Before their societies were destroyed by European influence, the Ona of Tierra del Fuego were most likely to raid neighbors who trespassed in pursuit of guanaco. Similarly, the Washo Indians of the Great Basin attacked bands who fished “their” lakes or hunted “their” deer in the more stable portions of the winter home ranges. The Nyae Nyae Bushmen believed that they had the right to kill neighbors who gathered vital plant foods from their foraging areas. The Walbiri of the Australian desert were especially concerned over water holes. One band could enter the range of another only by permission, and trespassers were likely to be killed. Early observers recorded one pitched battle among Walbiri for the control of water wells in which more than twenty tribesmen were killed on each side.

Although these anecdotes have been known for a long time, it is only very recently that anthropologists have begun to analyze the evidences of human territory with the basic theory of animal ecology. Rada Dyson-Hudson and Eric A. Smith have noted that areas defended by hunter-gatherers are precisely those that appear to be the most economically defensible. When food resources are scattered in space and unpredictable in time, the bands do not defend their home ranges and in fact often share occasional discoveries of rich food sources. The Western Shoshoni, for example, occupied an arid portion of the Great Basin in which the amount of game and most plant foods was poor and unpredictable. Their population density was very low, about one person in twenty square miles, and hunting and foraging were usually conducted by solitary individuals or families. Their home ranges were correspondingly huge, and they were forced into a nomadic existence. Families shared information on good piñon crops, concentrations of locusts, and forthcoming rabbit drives. Western Shoshoni seldom aggregated long enough to form
bands or villages. They had no concept of ownership of land or any resource on it, with the single exception of eagle nests.

In contrast, the Owens Valley Paiute occupied relatively fertile land with denser stands of piñon pine and abundant game. Groups of villages were organized into bands, each of which owned sections of the valley that cut across the Owens River and extended up the mountains on either side. These territories were defended by means of social and religious sanctions reinforced with occasional threats and attacks. At most, the residents invited members of other bands, especially their relatives, to pick piñon nuts on their land.

The flexibility displayed by the Great Basin tribes parallels that occurring among other populations and species of mammals. In both men and animals its expression is correlated with the richness and spatial distribution of the most vital resources within the home range. But the range of expression is a characteristic of each species, and the total range of human beings, although unusually broad, does not encompass all of the animal patterns combined. In that sense human territorial behavior is genetically limited in its expression.

The biological formula of territorialism translates easily into the rituals of modern property ownership. When described by means of generalizations clear of emotion and Active embellishment this behavior acquires new flavor—at once intimately familiar, because our own daily lives are controlled by it, and yet distinctive and even very peculiar, because it is after all a diagnostic trait of just one mammalian species. Each culture develops its own particular rules to safeguard personal property and space. Pierre van den Berghe, a sociologist, has provided the following description of present-day behavior around vacation residences near Seattle:

Before entering familial territory, guests and visitors, especially if they are unexpected, regularly go through a ritual of identification,
 attention drawing, greeting and apology for the possible disturbance. This behavioral exchange takes place outdoors if the owner is first encountered there, and is preferably directed at adults. Children of the owners, if encountered first, are asked about the whereabouts of their parents. When no adult owners are met outdoors, the visitor typically goes to the dwelling door, where he makes an identifying noise, either by knocking on the door or ringing a bell if the door is closed, or by voice if the door is open. The threshold is typically crossed only on recognition and invitation by the owner. Even then, the guest feels free to enter only the sitting room, and usually makes additional requests to enter other parts of the house, such as a bathroom or bedroom.

When a visitor is present, he is treated by the other members of the [vacation residence] club as an extension of his host. That is, his limited privileges of territorial occupancy extend only to the territory of his host, and the host will be held responsible by other owners for any territorial transgressions of the guests . . . Children, too, are not treated as independent agents, but as extensions of their parents or of the adult “responsible” for them, and territorial transgressions of children, especially if repeated, are taken up with the parents or guardians.

The dirt road through the development is freely accessible to all members of the club who use it both to gain access to their lots and to take walks. Etiquette calls for owners to greet each other when seeing each other outdoors, but owners do not fed free to enter each other’s lots without some ritual of recognition. This ritual is, however, less formal and elaborate when entering lots outdoors than when entering houses.

War can be defined as the violent rupture of the intricate and 
powerful fabric of the territorial taboos observed by social groups. The force behind most warlike policies is ethnocentrism, the irrationally exaggerated allegiance of individuals to their kin and fellow tribesmen. In general, primitive men divide the world into two tangible parts, the near environment of home, local villages, kin, friends, tame animals, and witches, and the more distant universe of neighboring villages, intertribal allies, enemies, wild animals, and ghosts. This elemental topography makes easier the distinction between enemies who can be attacked and killed and friends who cannot. The contrast is heightened by reducing enemies to frightful and even subhuman status.

The Mundurucú headhunters of Brazil made all these distinctions and in addition literally turned their enemies into game. The warriors spoke of the *parivat* (non-Mundurucú) in the same language ordinarily reserved for peccary and tapir. A high status was conferred on the taker of a human trophy head. He was believed to have attained special influence with the supernatural powers of the forest. Warfare was refined into a high art, in which other tribes were skillfully hunted as though they were packs of especially dangerous animals.

The raids were planned with great care. In the cover of the predawn darkness the Mundurucú men circled the enemy village, while their shaman quietly blew a sleep trance on the people within. The attack began at dawn. Incendiary arrows were shot onto the thatched houses, then the attackers ran screaming out of the forest into the village, chased the inhabitants into the open, and decapitated as many adult men and women as possible. Because annihilation of an entire village was difficult and risky, the attackers soon retreated with the heads of their victims. They proceeded on forced march as far as they could before resting, then headed home or on to the next enemy village.

William H. Durham, who reanalyzed Robert F. Murphy's data
on the Mundurucú, has presented a convincing case that warfare and the game metaphor are direct adaptations that benefit the individual fitness of the headhunter warriors. In the traditional manner of the natural sciences, Durham applied the evidences of Mundurucú and other primitive warfare to a set of three mutually exclusive and competing hypotheses, which in this instance appear to exhaust the possibilities of the relation between heredity and culture.

Hypothesis 1: *Cultural traditions of warfare in primitive societies evolved independently of the ability of human beings to survive and reproduce*. People fight wars for various and sundry cultural reasons which have no consistent relation to genetic fitness, that is, to the survival and reproductive success of the individual and his close kin. Primitive war is not well explained by the principles of sociobiology; it is better understood as a purely cultural phenomenon, the product of social organization and political arrangements which themselves have nothing to do with fitness.

Hypothesis 2: *Cultural traditions of primitive warfare evolved by selective retention of traits that increase the inclusive genetic fitness of human beings*. People fight wars when they and their closest relatives stand to gain long-term reproductive success, in competition both with other tribes and with other members of their own tribe. Despite appearances to the contrary, warfare may be just one example of the rule that cultural practices are generally adaptive in a Darwinian sense.

Hypothesis 3: *Cultural traditions of primitive warfare evolved by a process of group selection that favored the self-sacrificing tendencies of some warriors*. The warriors fight battles for the good ot the group and do not therefore expect net benefits for themselves and their immediate kin. The tribe that prevailed was able to expand by increasing the absolute number of its altruistic warriors, even though this genetic type declined relative to the other members of the tribe during episodes of warfare. The proneness toward violent
aggression is a good example that cultural practices are directed to some extent by genetic traits favoring entire groups while disfavoring the individual members that display them.

In the case of the Mundurucu headhunters, it is the second hypothesis that best explains the actions of the warriors. Ferocity and bravery confer direct and tangible benefits on the individuals exhibiting these qualities. Although solid demographic proof is absent, indirect evidence suggests that numbers of the Mundurucu were (and still are, in a pacified state) limited by the shortage of high-quality protein. The prevailing density-dependent factor in the environment of the aboriginal savanna settlements of the Mundurucu appears to have been the quantity of game, especially peccaries, in nearby rain forests. Hunting was a major daily occupation of the men. They ordinarily worked in groups, because peccaries travel in herds, and afterward they divided the game among the families of their village in accordance with strict rules. Surrounding tribes competed for the same resource in the overlapping hunting ranges. When these competitors were decimated by murderous attacks, the Mundurucu share of the forest’s yield was correspondingly increased. The biological effect of warfare on the successfiil Mundurucu headhunters appears to have been straightforward.

Yet the Mundurucu themselves were not directly aware of any Darwinian edge. Their justification for warlike behavior was richly overlaid by the powerful but opaque sanctions of custom and religion. Headhunting was simply a given of their existence. Neither defense of territory nor provocation by other groups was remembered as a cause of war in tribal lore. Non-Mundurucu were victims by definition. “It might be said that enemy tribes caused the Mundurucu to go to war simply by existing,” Murphy writes, “and the word for enemy meant merely any group that was not Mundurucu.” Traditional religious practices were centered on supplications for the abundance of game and the ritual observance of rules for its
conservation. The Mundurucú believed that supernatural spirit “mothers” were poised to take swift vengeance on the hunter who killed for the hide and left the carcass to rot. So it is not very surprising that the concept of the enemy was subordinated to the concept of game. Or that the successful headhunter should be called *Dajeboisi*—“mother of the peccary.” Yet the Mundurucú did not arrive at these prescriptions through understanding the ecological principles of interference competition, density dependence, and animal and human demography. They invented a simpler and more vivid universe of friends, enemies, game, and the mediating spirits of the forest that serve the same end as a scientific understanding of ecology.

The particular forms of organized violence are not inherited. No genes differentiate the practice of platform torture from pole and stake torture, headhunting from cannibalism, the duel of champions from genocide. Instead there is an innate predisposition to manufacture the cultural apparatus of aggression, in a way that separates the conscious mind from the raw biological processes that the genes encode. Culture gives a particular form to the aggression and sanctifies the uniformity of its practice by all members of the tribe.

The cultural evolution of aggression appears to be guided jointly by the following three forces: (1) genetic predisposition toward learning some form of communal aggression; (2) the necessities imposed by the environment in which the society finds itself; and (3) the previous history of the group, which biasses it toward the adoption of one cultural innovation as opposed to another. To return to the more general metaphor used in developmental biology, the society undergoing cultural evolution can be said to be moving down the slope of a very long developmental landscape. The channels of formalized aggression are deep; culture is likely to turn into one or the other but not to avoid them completely. These channels are shaped by interaction between the genetic predisposition to learn
aggressive responses and the physical properties of the home range that favor particular forms of the responses. Society is influenced to take a particular direction by idiosyncratic features of its preexisting culture.

Thus the Mundurucú populations were apparently limited by scarcity of high-grade protein, and they perfected headhunting as the convention by which competition was diminished on the hunting grounds. The Yanomamö of southern Venezuela and northern Brazil, in contrast, are temporarily in the midst of rapid population growth and range expansion. Reproduction by the men is limited not by food but by the availability of women. A principle of animal sociobiology, still only partly tested, is that in times of plenty and in the absence of effective predators females tend to become a density-dependent factor limiting population growth. As Napoleon Chagnon has shown, the Yanomamö conduct their wars over women and in order to revenge deaths that ultimately trace back to competition for women. This is not a casual or frivolous preoccupation. They have been aptly called the “fierce people.” One village studied by Chagnon was raided twenty-five times in nineteen months by neighboring villages. One quarter of all Yanomamo men die in battle, but the surviving warriors are often wildly successful in the game of reproduction. The founder of one bloc of villages had forty-five children by eight wives. His sons were also prolific, so that approximately 75 percent of all of the sizable population in the village bloc were his descendants.

It is obvious that the specific conventions of aggression—for example ambush as opposed to open warfare, and ornamental stone axes as opposed to bamboo spears—are heavily influenced by the materials at hand and the bits and pieces of past custom that can be conveniently adapted. In Claude Lévi-Strauss's nice expression, culture uses the *bricolage* available to it. What is less obvious is the process that predisposes people to fabricate aggressive cultures. Only
by considering the determinants of aggression at the three levels— the ultimate, biological predisposition; the requirements of the present environment; and the accidental details that contribute to cultural drift—can we fully comprehend its evolution in human societies.

Although the evidence suggests that the biological nature of humankind launched the evolution of organized aggression and roughly directed its early history across many societies, the eventual outcome of that evolution will be determined by cultural processes brought increasingly under the control of rational thought. The practice of war is a straightforward example of a hypertrophied biological predisposition. Primitive men cleaved their universe into friends and enemies and responded with quick, deep emotion to even the mildest threats emanating from outside the arbitrary boundary. With the rise of chiefdoms and states, this tendency became institutionalized, war was adopted as an instrument of policy of some of the new societies, and those that employed it best became—tragically—the most successful. The evolution of warfare was an autocatalytic reaction that could not be halted by any people, because to attempt to reverse the process unilaterally was to fall victim. A new mode of natural selection was operating at the level of entire societies. In his pioneering work on the subject Quincy Wright wrote:



> Out of the warlike peoples arose civilization, while the peaceful collectors and hunters were driven to the ends of the earth, where they are gradually being exterminated or absorbed, with only the dubious satisfaction of observing the nations which had wielded war so effectively to destroy them and to become great, now victimized by their own instrument.

Keith Otterbein, an anthropologist, has studied quantitatively the variables affecting warlike behavior in forty-six cultures, from the
relatively unsophisticated Tiwi and Jivaro to more advanced societies such as the Egyptians, Aztecs, Hawaiians, and Japanese. His main conclusions will cause no great surprise: as societies become centralized and complex, they develop more sophisticated military organizations and techniques of battle, and the greater their military sophistication, the more likely they are to expand their territories and to displace competing cultures.

Civilizations have been propelled by the reciprocating thrusts of cultural evolution and organized violence, and in our time they have come to within one step of nuclear annihilation. Yet when countries have reached the brink, in the Formosan Straits, Cuba, and the Middle East, their leaders have proved able to turn back. In Abba Eban's memorable words on the occasion of the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, men use reason as a last resort.

Not only that, but the full evolution of warfare can be reversed, even in the face of entrenched cultural practice. In pre-European times the Maori of New Zealand were among the most aggressive people on earth. Raids among their forty tribes were frequent and bloody. Insults, hostility, and retribution were carefully tallied in tribal memories. Defense of personal honor and courage were the paramount virtues, victory by force of arms the highest achievement. According to Andrew Vayda, an expert on primitive war, the prime mover of Maori warfare was ecological competition. Revenge led to open fighting for land and then to territorial conquests. Alliances were based on kinship; the Maoris consciously and explicitly expanded against the territories of the genealogically most distant lineages. In 1837, when Hokianga warriors arrived at one fight already in progress between two sections of the Nga Puhi tribe, they were undecided about the side to join, because they were equally related to both. The major effect of these territorial wars was stabilization of the population. As groups became overcrowded, they expanded by displacing and reducing rival groups. The Maori 
population was a constantly shifting mosaic of tribal groups held at a level density overall, like the lion populations of Kenya, by territorial aggression acting as an ecological control.

This terrible equilibrium was finally disrupted and reversed when European firearms were introduced. The Maoris were understandably enchanted by the first muskets that the British colonists showed them. One traveller recorded such an encounter around 1815:



> Firing with my fowling-piece, at a bird that had settled on an adjacent tree, I happened to kill it, and this instantly threw the whole village, men, women, and children into violent confusion; who, knowing not how to account for the seeming phenomenon, testified the appalling effect it had upon them, by setting up a tremendous shout, and astounding my ears with their uproar. While in the act of shewing them the bird I had killed, which they examined very attentively, perceiving another on the same tree, I fired at this also, and brought it down; which occasioned a repetition of their amazement and made them vociferate even louder than at first.



Within a few years Maori leaders acquired guns of their own and began to employ them with devastating effect on their neighbors. One individual, the Nga Puhi chief Hongi Hiki, bought 300 guns from British traders and launched a brief career as a conqueror. Before his death in 1828, he and his allies led numerous expeditions and killed thousands of people. While their immediate motivation was revenge for old defeats, they not coincidentally extended the power and territory of the Nga Puhi. Other tribes rushed to arm themselves in order to regain parity in the escalating hostilities.

The arms race soon became self-limiting. Even the victors paid a heavy price. To obtain more muskets, the Maoris devoted inordinate amounts of their time to producing flax and other goods that could be traded to the Europeans for guns. And in order to grow
more flax many moved to the swampy lowlands, where large numbers died of disease. During the approximately twenty years of musket war, fully one quarter of the population died from one cause or another related to the conflict. By 1830 the Nga Puhi had begun to question the use of lighting for revenge; the old values crumbled soon afterward. In the late 1830s and early 1840s the Maoris as a whole converted rapidly and massively to Christianity, and warfare among the tribes ceased entirely.

To recapitulate the total argument, human aggression cannot be explained as either a dark-angelic flaw or a bestial instinct. Nor is it the pathological symptom of upbringing in a cruel environment. Human beings are strongly predisposed to respond with unreasoning hatred to external threats and to escalate their hostility sufficiently to overwhelm the source of the threat by a respectably wide margin of safety. Our brains do appear to be programmed to the following extent: we are inclined to partition other people into friends and aliens, in the same sense that birds are inclined to learn territorial songs and to navigate by the polar constellations. We tend to fear deeply the actions of strangers and to solve conflict by aggression. These learning rules are most likely to have evolved during the past hundreds of thousands of years of human evolution and, thus, to have conferred a biological advantage on those who conformed to them with the greatest fidelity.

The learning rules of violent aggression are largely obsolete. We are no longer hunter-gatherers who settle disputes with spears, arrows, and stone axes. But to acknowledge the obsolescence of the rules is not to banish them. We can only work our way around them, To let them rest latent and unsummoned, we must consciously undertake those difficult and rarely travelled pathways in psychological development that lead to mastery over and reduction of the profound human tendency to learn violence.

The Yanomamö have been heard to say, “We are tired of fighting.
We don't want to kill anymore. But the others are treacherous and cannot be trusted.” It is not hard to see that all people think the same way. With pacifism as a goal, scholars and political leaders will find it useful to deepen studies in anthropology and social psychology, and to express this technical knowledge openly as part of political science and daily diplomatic procedure. To provide a more durable foundation for peace, political and cultural ties can be promoted that create a confusion of cross-binding loyalties. Scientists, great writers, some of the more successful businessmen, and Marxist-Leninists have been doing just that more or less unconsciously for generations. If the tangle is spun still more thickly, it will become discouragingly difficult for future populations to regard each other as completely discrete on the basis of congruent distinctions in race, language, nationhood, religion, ideology, and economic interest. Undoubtedly there exist other techniques by which this aspect of human nature can be gently hobbled in the interest of human welfare.



