---
title: Chapter 3. Development
book: 
  title: on human nature
  author: Edward O. Wilson
category: human_nature
permalink: /books/on_human_nature/03_Development.html
date: 2014-04-11 10:04:00 +0800
layout: book_page 
---

The newly fertilized egg, a corpuscle one two-hundredth of an inch in diameter, is not a human being. It is a set of instructions sent floating into the cavity of the womb. Enfolded within its spherical nucleus are an estimated 250 thousand or more pairs of genes, of which fifty thousand will direct the assembly of the proteins and the remainder will regulate their rates of development. After the egg penetrates the blood-engorged wall of the uterus, it divides again and again. The expanding masses of daughter cells fold and crease into ridges, loops, and layers. Then, shifting like some magical kaleidoscope, they self-assemble into the fetus, a precise configuration of blood vessels, nerves, and other complex tissues. Each division and migration of the cells is orchestrated by a flow of chemical information that proceeds from the genes to the outer array of proteins, fats, and carbohydrates that make up the substance of the constituent cells.

In nine months a human being has been created. Functionally it is a digestive tube surrounded by sheaths of muscle and a skin. Its parts are continuously freshened with blood forced through closed blood vessels by the rhythmic pumping of the recently formed heart The limited bodily actions are coordinated by an intricate interplay of
hormones and nerves. The reproductive organs lie dormant; they await the precise hormonal signals that years later will trigger the second, final phase of their growth and call upon them to complete the organism’s ultimate biological role. Atop this ensemble sits the brain. Its weight is one pound, its consistency that of thick custard, and its fine structure the most complicated machinery ever produced on earth. The brain contains an exact configuration of about ten billion neurons, or cellular units, each of which makes hundreds or even thousands of contacts with other neurons. Vast numbers of nerve fibers pass down from the brain through the spinal cord, where they connect with still other nerves that relay information and instructions back and forth to the remaining organs of the body. The central nervous system, comprising the brain and spinal cord in tandem, receives electrical signals from no fewer than a billion sensory elements, from the visual rods of the retina to the pressure-sensitive corpuscles of the skin.

The newborn infant is now seen to be wired with awesome precision. The movements of its eyes are steered by thousands of nerve cells that fan out from the eye muscles to reflex stations between the eye and brain, as well as by higher integrating centers scattered over the frontal eyefields and other centers of the brain’s cortex. The baby listens: sounds of each frequency activate a particular cluster of receptors in die inner ear, which pass signals to corresponding masses of nerve cells at successively higher levels of the brain. The signals proceed inward, as though melodies were being played on a piano keyboard projected from the inner ear, then again by a new diatonic scale at way-stations in the hindbrain, next at the inferior colliculi of the midbrain and the medial geniculate bodies of the forebrain, and finally at the auditory cortex of the forebrain, where in some manner beyond our present understanding the mind “hears” the sound.

This marvelous robot is launched into the world under the care of its parents. Its rapidly accumulating experience will soon 
transform it into an independently thinking and feeling individual. Then the essential components of social behavior will be added—language, pair bonding, rage at ego injury, love, tribalism, and all the remainder of the human-specific repertory. But to what extent does the wiring of the neurons, so undeniably encoded in the genes, preordain the directions that social development will follow? Is it possible that the wiring diagram has been constructed by evolution only to be an allpurpose device, adaptable through learning to any mode of social existence?

This then is the frame of reference by which we can grasp the frill dimensions of the empirical problem of human behavior: from 250 thousand genes to ten billion neurons to an unknown potential variety of social systems. In the last chapter I used the comparison of mankind with species of social animals to demonstrate that contemporaneous human behavior is constrained by heredity. As anticipated by evolutionary theory, behavioral development is channeled in the direction of the most generally mammalian traits. But what is the ultimate range of our potential? How far can human beings be moved across or even outside the mammalian channels? The answer must be sought in the study of individual development with special reference to genetic determinism.

We have at last come to the key phrase: genetic determinism. On its interpretation depends the entire relation between biology and the social sciences, To those who wish to reject the implications of sociobiology out of hand, it means that development is insect-like, confined to a single channel, running from a given set of genes to the corresponding single predestined pattern of behavior. The life of a mosquito does fit this narrow conception perfectly. When a winged adult emerges from its pupal case, it has only a few days to complete a set of intricate maneuvers leading to the deposit of a set of fertilized eggs in organically contaminated water. Both sexes get swiftly 10 work. The whine created by the wingbeat of the female, so irritating
 to the human ear, is a love song to the male. With no previous experience he flies toward the sound. The whine of a female yellow-fever mosquito is between 450 and 600 hertz (cycles per second). In the laboratory, entomologists have attracted males simply by striking a tuning fork set at these frequencies. When a cheese cloth is placed over the tuning fork, some of the more excited mosquitoes attempt to mate with it. The female mosquito cannot afford to be quite so impetuous, yet the episodes of her life follow a rigid marching order prescribed by her genes. She seeks out human and other mammalian prey by their warmth or, in the case of some species, by the odor of lactic acid emanating from the skin. Alighting, she probes the skin with two microscopic, thread-like and sharpened stylets. The points are plunged through the skin in search of a blood vessel, much as oil prospectors sink a well. Sometimes they strike a vessel and sometimes not. The female of at least one species of mosquito identifies blood by the taste of a chemical called adenosine diphosphate (ADP) found in the red cells. The only apparent significance of ADP among the hundreds of available blood constituents is that it serves as an immediately accessible marker. Other, similarly arbitrary “sign stimuli” guide the mosquito to appropriate ponds and smaller bodies of water where she can lay her eggs in safety.

The mosquito is an automaton. It can afford to be nothing else. There are only about one hundred thousand nerve cells in its tiny head, and each one has to pull its weight. The only way to run accurately and successfully through a life cycle in a matter of days is by instinct, a sequence of rigid behaviors programmed by the genes to unfold swiftly and unerringly from birth to the final act of oviposition.

The channels of human mental development, in contrast, are circuitous and variable. Rather than specify a single trait, human genes prescribe the capacity to develop a certain array of traits. In some categories of behavior, the array is limited and the outcome can be
altered only by strenuous training—if ever. In others, the array is vast and the outcome easily influenced.

An example of a restricted behavior is handedness. Each person is biologically predisposed to be either left- or right-handed. In present-day Western societies parents are relatively tolerant of the outcome in their children, who therefore follow the direction set by the genes affecting this trait. But traditional Chinese societies still exert a strong social pressure for right-handed writing and eating. In their recent study of Taiwanese children, Evelyn Lee Teng and her associates found a nearly complete conformity in these two activities but little or no effect on handedness in other activities not subjected to special training. Thus in this behavioral trait the genes have their way unless specifically contravened by conscious choice.

The evolution of capacity is illustrated in a still more graphic fashion by the genetic condition called phenylketonuria (PKU), which produces feeblemindedness as a physiological side effect. PKU is caused by the possession of a single pair of recessive genes among the hundreds of thousands of paired genes on the human chromosomes. Persons afflicted with a double dose of the PKU gene are unable to utilize a common dietary element, the amino acid phenylalanine. When the chemical breakdown of phenylalanine is blocked, abnormal intermediate products accumulate in the body. The urine turns dark on exposure to air and emits a distinctive mousy smell. One child out of approximately every ten thousand bom has this genetic defect. Unless the poisoning is reversed by the time the PKU individual reaches the age of four to six months, he suffers an irreversible mental retardation. Fortunately, the disaster can be avoided by early diagnosis and restriction to a diet kept low in phenylalanine. In PKU the interaction between genes and environment is displayed in its simplest conceivable form. The infant bom with two PKU genes has the capacity for either normal mental development or impairment, with a strong bias toward the latter. Only by making an
extraordinary and very particular change in the environment—feeding the PKU infant a low-phenylalanine diet—can the bias be reversed. Thus, in order to predict with reasonable certainty whether any given newborn infant will have normal intelligence or succumb to the feeblemindedness of PKU, it is necessary to know both the genes and the environment.

Few behaviors are under the control of one or two genes, or can be turned on and off in the manner of PKU mental retardation. And even in the case of PKU, the trait is one of crude impairment rather than a subtle shift in patterns of response. A more typical relationship between genes and behavior is shown by schizophrenia, the commonest form of mental illness. Schizophrenia is not a simple cessation or distortion of normal behavior. A few psychiatrists, most notably Thomas Szasz and R. D. Laing, have viewed it as no more than an arbitrary label imposed by society on certain deviant individuals. But they have been proved almost certainly wrong. It is true that schizophrenia appears on the surface to be a purposeless melange of odd responses. It consists of various combinations of hallucinations, delusions, inappropriate emotional responses, compulsively repeated movements of no particular significance, and even the deathlike immobilization of the catatonic trance. The variations are endlessly subtle, and psychiatrists have learned to treat each patient as a unique case. The borderline between normal and schizophrenic people is broad and nearly imperceptible. Mild schizophrenics function undetected among us in large numbers, while fully normal persons are sometimes erroneously diagnosed as schizophrenics. Nevertheless, three extreme kinds of schizophrenia are unmistakable: the haunted paranoid surrounded by his imaginary community of spies and assassins, the clownish, sometimes incontinent hebephrenic, and the frozen catatonic. Although the capacity to become schizophrenic may well be within all of us, there is no question that certain persons have distinctive genes predisposing them to the condition. Individuals
 taken from schizophrenic parents in infancy and placed with normal adoptive parents subsequently develop schizophrenic symptoms at a much higher rate than those given up for adoption by unafflicted parents. The data from hundreds of such cases have been analyzed painstakingly by Seymour Kety in collaboration with a team of American and Danish psychologists. Their results show conclusively that a major part of the tendency to become schizophrenic is inherited.

Evidence has also been adduced that schizophrenia is widespread in other kinds of human societies. Jane Murphy has found that both Eskimos from the Bering Sea and the Yorubas of Nigeria recognize and label a set of symptoms resembling the Western syndrome of schizophrenia. The afflicted individuals are, moreover, classified as mentally ill—their condition is called *nutbkavibak* by the Eskimos and were by the Yorubas—and they form a substantial fraction of the clientele of the tribal shamans and healers. The incidence of clear-cut schizophrenia is about the same as in Western societies; it ranges between 0.4 and 0.7 percent of the adult population.

Schizophrenia develops in a more complicated manner than PKU and most other hereditary forms of mental retardation. Whether a single gene or many genes are responsible is not known. Distinctive changes occur in the physiology of schizophrenics, and medical researchers may soon succeed in linking them directly to the mental aberrations. For example, Philip Seeman and Tyrone Lee have found that key areas of the brains of some schizophrenics contain twice the normal number of receptors for dopamine, a substance that carries signals between nerve cells. It is possible that this abnormality makes the brain unduly sensitive to its own signals and hence subject to hallucination. Yet the old psychological theories also have an element of truth: environment plays an important role in the development of the syndrome. There is such a thing as a typically “schizo-phrenogenic” (schizophrenia-producing) family arrangement, one
most likely to produce a mentally ill adult from a child with the potential for the disease. In it trust has ended, communication has broken down, and the parents openly express contempt for each other while placing unreasonable demands on their children. Some psychiatrists even see a kind of twisted rationale in the mind of the schizophrenic: the individual tries to escape from his intolerable social environment by creating a private inner world. But the fact remains that certain genes predispose individuals toward schizophrenia. Individuals possessing them can develop the pathology while growing up in the midst of normal, supportive families.

Thus even in the relatively simple categories of behavior we inherit a capacity for certain traits, and a bias to learn one or another of those available. Scientists as diverse in their philosophies as Konrad Lorenz, Robert A. Hinde, and B. F. Skinner have often stressed that no sharp boundary exists between the inherited and the acquired. It has become apparent that we need new descriptive techniques to replace the archaic distinction between nature and nurture. One of the most promising is based on the imagery invented by Conrad H. Waddington, the great geneticist who died in 1975. Waddington said that development is something like a landscape that descends from highlands to the shore. Development of a trait—eye color, handedness, schizophrenia, or whatever—resembles the rolling of a ball down the slopes. Each trait traverses a different part of the landscape, each is guided by a different pattern of ridges and valleys. In the case of eye color, given a starting set of genes for blue or some other iris pigment, the topography is a single, deep channel. The ball rolls inexorably to one destination: once the egg has been joined by a sperm, only one eye color is possible. The developmental landscape of the mosquito can be similarly envisioned as a parallel series of deep, unbranching valleys, one leading to the sexual attraction of the wingbeat's sound, another to automatic bloodsucking, and so on through a repertory of ten or so discrete responses. The valleys form
a precise, unyielding series of biochemical steps that proceed from the DNA in the fertilized egg to the neuromuscular actions mediated by the mosquito's brain.

The developmental topography of human behavior is enormously broader and more complicated, but it is still a topography. In some cases the valleys divide once or twice. An individual can end up either right- or left-handed. If he starts with the genes or other early physiological influences that predispose him to the left hand, that branch of the developmental channel can be viewed as cutting the more deeply. If no social pressure is exerted the ball will in most cases roll on down into the channel for left-handedness. But if parents train the child to use the right hand, the ball can be nudged into the shallower channel for right-handedness. The landscape for schizophrenia is a broader network of anastomosing channels, more difficult to trace, and the ball’s course is only statistically predictable.

The landscape is just a metaphor, and it is certainly inadequate for the most complex phenomena, but it focuses on a crucial truth about human social behavior. If we are to gain full understanding of its determination, each behavior must be treated separately and traced, to some extent, as a developmental process leading from the genes to the final product.

Some forms will prove more susceptible to this mode of analysis than others. The facial expressions displaying the basic emotions of fear, loathing, anger, surprise, and happiness appear to be invariant traits of all human beings. Paul Ekman, a psychologist, took photographs of Americans acting out these emotions. He also photographed stone-age tribesmen as they told stories during which the same feelings were expressed. When members of one of the cultures were then shown the portraits from the other, they interpreted the meanings of die facial expressions with a better than eighty percent accuracy. Irenäus Eibl-Eibesfeldt, traveling to remote communities around the world, has made motion pictures of people as they 
communicate by gestures and facial expressions. In order to prevent them from being self-conscious, he photographs them through a prism set over the camera lens, an adjustment that permits him to face away from his subject at right angles. Eibl-Eibesfeldt has documented a rich repertory of signals that are widely or even universally distributed through both literate and preliterate cultures. One relatively unfamiliar example is the eyebrow flash—a sudden, mostly unconscious lifting of the eyebrows used as part of a friendly greeting.

Another example of a universal signal being newly studied by human ethologists is the smile, which might qualify as an instinct in a virtually zoological sense. The smile appears on the infant's face between two and four months of age and immediately triggers a more abundant share of parental love and affection. In the terminology of the zoologist, it is a social releaser, an inborn and relatively invariant signal that mediates a basic social relationship. Melvin J. Konner, an anthropologist, has recently completed a study of the smile and other forms of infant behavior in the !Kung San (“Bushmen”) of the Kalahari. As he began his daily observations he was “ready for anything,” since the !Kung youngsters are raised under very different conditions from those prevailing in Western cultures. They are delivered alone by their mothers, without anesthetic, kept in almost constant physical contact with their mothers or other nurses during the next several months, held in a vertical position during most of their waking hours, nursed several times an hour for the first three or four years, and trained more rigorously than European and American children to sit, stand, and walk. Yet their smile is identical in form, appears at the same age as in American children, and appears to serve exactly the same functions. Still more convincing is the evidence that blind and even deaf-blind children develop the smile in the absence of any known psychological conditioning that favors it.

The simplest and most automatic of such behaviors may well be
genetically hard-wired into the cellular units of the human brain and facial nerves, such that the pattern of contraction of the facial muscles develops during early postnatal development by a chain of physiological events requiring a minimum of learning. Closer investigations in the future are likely to disclose the existence of genetic mutations that affect the form and intensity of the neuromuscular actions. If such exceptionally simple phenomena do occur, their discovery will set the stage for our first entrance into the genetics of human communication.

The imagery of the developmental landscape must be altered subtly as increasing amounts of learning and culture come to prevail on the downward slopes. In the case of language, dress, and the other culturally sensitive categories of behavior, the landscape dissolves into a vast delta of low ridges and winding oxbows. Consider in particular the maturation of language. There is evidence that the human mind is innately structured so as to string words together in certain arrangements and not others. According to Noam Chomsky and some other psycholinguists, this “deep grammar” permits a far more rapid acquisition of language than would be possible by simple learning. It is demonstrable by mathematical simulation alone that not enough time exists during childhood to learn English sentences by rote. Young children, unlike the young of any other primates including chimpanzees, possess a fierce drive to acquire speech: they babble, invent words, experiment with meaning, and pick up grammatical rules swiftly and in predictable sequence; they create constructions that anticipate the adult forms and yet differ from them in significant details. Roger Brown, a specialist on child development, has appropriately termed their achievement the “first language.” Comparisons between the performances of identical and fraternal twins indicate that variation in the timing of this development depends to some degree on heredity. The upper slope in the developmental field of language is thus a relatively simple and deeply 
canalized terrain. But the channels of the broad lower slope, where the intricacies of the “second,” adult language emerge, make up a shallowly etched network that ramifies in many directions. The outer manifestations of language shift with cultural evolution; they are to a large degree cultural evolution. The subtlest pressures from education and fashion alter vocabulary, emphasis, and tempo.

But what in reality corresponds to the metaphorical ridges and channels? In some cases, behaviorally potent hormones, or other biochemical products prescribed by the genes during the construction of nerve cells, etch the channels. Simple compounds can alter the capacity of the nervous system to function in one way as opposed to another. Of equal importance may be the more distantly removed “learning rules,” the steps and procedures based on the action of particular sets of nerve cells by which various forms of learning are achieved.

It is commonplace to think of learning as an all-purpose phenomenon that varies little in principle from one kind of organism to the next. Many of the best psychologists, especially B. F. Skinner and other behaviorists, have held stubbornly to the view that most kinds of behavior are shaped by a few elementary forms of learning. By placing animals in simplified laboratory environments, where stimulation can be strictly controlled, the general laws governing learning will be revealed. “The general topography of operant behavior is not important,” Skinner wrote in 1938, “because most if not all specific operants are conditioned. I suggest that the dynamic properties of operant behavior may be studied with a single reflex.” In his influential book *Beyond Freedom and Dignity*, Skinner argued that once these laws are well understood, they can be used to train human beings to lead happier, more enriched lives. The culture can first be designed by the wisest members of society, and then children fitted painlessly to it.

These are powerful ideas, with seductive precedents in the 
physical sciences, and they have resulted in substantial advances in the study of animal and human behavior. The central idea of the philosophy of behaviorism, that behavior and the mind have an entirely materialist basis subject to experimental analysis, is fundamentally sound. Nevertheless, the underlying assumptions of simplicity and equipotentiality in learning have crumbled. In their place has emerged a picture of the existence of many peculiar types of learning that conform to no general law except, perhaps, evolution by natural selection. The learning potential of each species appears to be fully programmed by the structure of its brain, the sequence of release of its hormones, and, ultimately, its genes. Each animal species is “prepared” to learn certain stimuli, barred from learning others, and neutral with respect to still others. For example, adult herring gulls quickly learn to distinguish their newly hatched chicks but never their own eggs, which are nevertheless just as visually distinct. The newborn kitten is blind, barely able to crawl on its stomach, and generally helpless. Nevertheless, in the several narrow categories in which it must perforin in order to survive, it is endowed with an advanced ability to learn. Using smell alone, it learns in less than one day to crawl short distances to the spot where it can expect to find the nursing mother. With the aid of either odor or touch the kitten memorizes the route along the mother’s belly to its own preferred nipple. In laboratory tests it quickly comes to tell one artificial nipple from another by minor differences in texture.

Even more impressive examples have been discovered. Each year indigo buntings migrate between their breeding grounds in eastern North America and their wintering grounds in South America. Like many of our other native birds they travel at night. After leaving the nest, young him tings are prepared to learn the north star and circumpolar constellations, which they proceed to do quickly and automatically. They are inhibited from learning the other constellations. When domestic chicks are given a mild electric shock at the beak
while drinking water and are simultaneously given a visual stimulus such as a flash of light, they afterward avoid the visual stimulus, but they do not learn to avoid an auditory stimulus, a clicking sound, in the same way. The reverse is true when the shock is administered to the feet; that is, the chick is prepared to learn sound but not visual cues. This symmetry may seem odd at first but is actually a precise survival rule for a small-brained animal. The chick’s procedure can be summarized in the following simple formula; learn the things you can see that affect the head and the things you can hear that affect the feet.

So some of the more rigid forms of animal instinct can be based on idiosyncratic forms of prepared learning. But is human learning prepared? Certainly not in the same robotic fashion as the responses of birds and blind kittens. We like to think that given enough time and will power we can learn anything. Yet constraints exist. We have to concede that there are sharp limits in quantity and complexity to what can be mastered even by geniuses and professional mnemonists, and that everyone acquires certain mental skills far more easily than others. Of still greater significance, children acquire skills and emotions by schedules that are difficult to alter. Switzerland’s eminent developmental psychologist, Jean Piaget, has spent a lifetime charting the often surprising stages children pass through in their more purely intellectual growth. The mind follows parallel but tightly coupled tracks in elaborating intentional movements, concepts of meaning and causality, space, time, imitation, and play. Its very conception of reality shifts step by step as the reflex-dominated infant changes into the egocentric and then sociable child. From single-minded efforts to move objects the child’s activity grows into a detached reflection on the movements themselves. The objects are first perceived as unique entities and then as members of groups to be classified with the aid of visual symbols and names. Piaget, who was originally trained as a biologist, views intellectual development as an
interaction of an inherited genetic program with the environment. It is no coincidence that he calls this conception “genetic epistemology,” in effect the study of the hereditary unfolding of understanding.

In his important works *Attachment and Separation*, John Bowlby has traced comparable steps in the formation of emotional bonds by which the child creates a complex social world around its parents over a period of months. Lawrence Kohlberg has identified a relatively tight order of Piagetian stages in the growth of moral codes, while psycholinguists have proved that young children acquire language by a time table too precise and too short to be explainable by simple memorization. Considering these accomplishments together, one gains the impression of a social world too complex to be constructed by random learning processes in a lifetime.

So the human mind is not a tabula rasa, a clean slate on which experience draws intricate pictures with lines and dots. It is more accurately described as an autonomous decision-making instrument, an alert scanner of the environment that approaches certain kinds of choices and not others in the first place, then innately leans toward one option as opposed to others and urges the body into action according to a flexible schedule that shifts automatically and gradually from infancy into old age. The accumulation of old choices, the memory of them, the reflection on those to come, the re-experiencing of emotions by which they were engendered, all constitute the mind. Particularities in decision making distinguish one human being from another. But the rules followed are tight enough to produce a broad overlap in the decisions taken by all individuals and hence a convergence powerful enough to be labelled human nature.

It is possible to estimate roughly the relative strictness of the controls on various categories of behavior. Genetic studies based on the comparison of identical and fraternal twins suggest that primary mental abilities and perceptual and motor skills are the most 
influenced by heredity, while personality traits are the least influenced. If this important result is confirmed by additional studies, the inference to be drawn is that the abilities needed to cope with relatively invariant problems in the physical environment develop along narrow channels, while the qualities of personality, which represent adjustments to the rapidly shifting social environment, are more malleable.

Other correlations of wide significance are suggested by the evolutionary hypothesis. The less rational but more important the decision-making process, for example, the more emotion should be expended in conducting it. The biologist can restate the relationship as follows: much of mental development consists of steps that must be taken quickly and automatically to insure survival and reproduction. Because the brain can be guided by rational calculation only to a limited degree, it must fall back on the nuances of pleasure and pain mediated by the limbic system and other lower centers of the brain.

We can search among the unconscious, emotion-laden learning rules for the kind of behavior most directly influenced by genetic evolution. Consider the phobias. Like many examples of animal learning, they originate most frequently in childhood and are deeply irrational, emotionally colored, and difficult to eradicate. It seems significant that they are most often evoked by snakes, spiders, rats, heights, close spaces, and other elements that were potentially dangerous in our ancient environment, but only rarely by modem artifacts such as knives, guns, and electrical outlets. In early human history phobias might have provided the extra margin needed to insure survival: better to crawl away from a cliff, nauseated by fear, than to walk its edge absent-mindedly.

The incest taboo is an example of another major category of primed learning. As the anthropologists Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox have pointed out, the taboo can be regarded as simply a special case of the more general rule of the precluding of bonds. When two persons form one kind of strong bond between themselves, they find it
emotionally difficult to join in certain other kinds. Teachers and students are slow to become colleagues even after the students surpass their mentors; mothers and daughters seldom change the tone of their original relationship. And incest taboos are virtually universal in human cultures because fathers and daughters, mothers and sons, and brothers and sisters find their primary bonds to be nearly all-exclusive. People, in short, are deterred from learning the precluded bonds.

Conversely, people are prepared to learn the genetically most advantageous relationships. The processes of sexual pairbonding vary greatly among cultures, but they are everywhere steeped in emotional feeling. In cultures with a romantic tradition, the attachment can be rapid and profound, creating love beyond sex which, once experienced, permanently alters the adolescent mind. Description of this part of human ethology is the refined specialty of poets, as we see in the remarkable expression by James Joyce:

> A girl stood before him in midstream, alone and still, gazing out to sea. She seemed like one whom magic had changed into the likeness of a strange and beautiful seabird. Her long slender bare legs were delicate as a crane’s and pure save where an emerald trail of seaweed had fashioned itself as a sign upon the flesh .. . Her long fair hair was girlish: and girlish, and touched with the wonder of mortal beauty, her face . . . When she felt his presence and the worship of his eyes her eyes turned to him in quiet sufferance of his gaze, without shame or wantonness . . . Her image had passed into his soul for ever and no word had broken the silence of his ecstasy. (*A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man*)

Prepared learning is logically sought in the other turning points of the life cycle at which our deepest feelings are fixed. Human beings have a strong tendency, for example, to manufacture thresholds
 across which they step ritualistically from one existence to another. Culture elaborates the rites of passage—initiation, marriage, confirmation, and inauguration—in ways perhaps affected by still hidden biological prime movers. In all periods of life there is an equally powerful urge to dichotomize, to classify other human beings into two artificially sharpened categories. We seem able to be fully comfortable only when the remainder of humanity can be labelled as members versus nonmembers, kin versus nonkin, friend versus foe. Erik Erikson has written on the proneness of people everywhere to perform pseudospeciation, the reduction of alien societies to the status of inferior species, not fully human, who can be degraded without conscience. Even the gentle San of the Kalahari call themselves the !Kung—the human beings. These and other of the all-too-human predispositions make complete sense only when valuated in the coinage of generic advantage. Like the appealing springtime songs of male birds that serve to defend territories and to advertise aggression, they possess an esthetic whose true, deadly meaning is at first concealed from our conscious minds.

