---
title: Chapter 8. Religion
book: 
  title: on human nature
  author: Edward O. Wilson
category: human_nature
permalink: /books/on_human_nature/08_Religion.html
date: 2014-04-11 19:10:00 +0800
layout: book_page 
---

Chapter 8. Religion

The predisposition to religious belief is the most complex and powerful force in the human mind and in all probability an ineradicable part of human nature. Emile Durkheim, an agnostic, characterized religious practice as the consecration of the group and the core of society. It is one of the universal of social behavior, taking recognizable form in every society from hunter-gatherer bands to socialist republics. Its rudiments go back at least to the bone altars and funerary rites of Neanderthal man. At Shanidar, Iraq, sixty thousand years ago, Neanderthal people decorated a grave with seven species of flowers having medicinal and economic value, perhaps to honor a shaman. Since that time, according to the anthropologist Anthony F.C. Wallace, mankind has produced on the order of 100 thousand religions.

Skeptics continue to nourish the belief that science and learning will banish religion, which they consider to be no more than a tissue of illusions. The noblest among them are sure that humanity migrates toward knowledge by logotaxis, an automatic orientation toward information, so that organized religion must continue its retreat as darkness before enlightenment’s brightening dawn. But this conception of human nature, with roots going back to Aristotle and
Zeno, has never seemed so futile as today. If anything, knowledge is being enthusiastically harnessed to the service of religion. The United States, technologically and scientifically the most sophisticated nation in history, is also the second most religious—after India. According to a Gallup poll taken in 1977, 94 percent of Americans believe in God or some form of higher being, while 31 percent have undergone a moment of sudden religious insight or awakening, their brush with the epiphany. The most successful book in 1975 was Billy Graham's Angels: God's Secret Messengers, which sold 810 thousand hard-cover copies.

In the Soviet Union, organized religion still flourishes and may even be undergoing a small renaissance after sixty years of official discouragement. In a total population of 250 million, at least thirty million are members of the Orthodox Church—twice the number in the Communist Party—five million are Roman Catholics and Lutherans, and another two million belong to evangelical sects such as the Baptists, Pentacostals, and Seventh-Day Adventists. Still another twenty to thirty million are Moslems, while 2.5 million belong to that most resilient of all groups, Orthodox Jews. Thus, institutionalized Soviet Marxism, which is itself a form of religion embellished with handsome trappings, has failed to displace what many Russians for centuries have considered the soul of their national existence.

Scientific humanism has done no better. In his System of Positive Polity, published between 1846 and 1854, Auguste Comte argued that religious superstition can be defeated at its source. He recommended that educated people fabricate a secular religion consisting of hierarchies, liturgy, canons, and sacraments not unlike those of Roman Catholicism, but with society replacing God as the Grand Being to worship. Today, scientists and other scholars, organized into learned groups such as the American Humanist Society and Institute on Religion in an Age of Science, support little magazines distributed by subscription and organize campaigns to discredit 
Christian fundamentalism, astrology, and Immanuel Velikovsky. Their crisply logical salvos, endorsed by whole arrogances of Nobel Laureates, pass like steel-jacketed bullets through fog. The humanists are vastly outnumbered by true believers, by the people who follow Jeane Dixon but have never heard of Ralph Wendell Bur-hoe. Men, it appears, would rather believe than know. They would rather have the void as purpose, as Nietzsche despairingly wrote so long ago when science was at its full promise, than be void of purpose.

Other well-meaning scholars have tried to reconcile science and religion by compartmentalizing the two rivals. Newton saw himself not only as a scientist but as a historical scholar whose duty was to decipher the Scriptures as a true historical record. Although his own mighty effort created the first modem synthesis of the physical sciences, he regarded that achievement as only a way station to an understanding of the supernatural. The Creator, he believed, has given the scholar two works to read, the book of nature and the book of scriptures. Today, thanks to the relentless advance of the science which Newton pioneered, God’s immanence has been pushed to somewhere below the subatomic particles or beyond the farthest visible galaxy. This apparent exclusion has spurred still other philosophers and scientists to create “process theology,” in which God’s presence is inferred from the inherent properties of atomic structure. As conceived originally by Alfred North Whitehead, God is not to be viewed as an extraneous force, who creates miracles and presides over the metaphysical verities. He is present continuously and ubiquitously. He covertly guides the emergence of molecules from atoms, living organisms from molecules, and mind from matter. The properties of the electron cannot be finally announced until their end product, the mind, is understood. Process is reality, reality process, and the hand of God is manifest in the laws of science. Hence religious and scientific pursuits are intrinsically compatible, so that
well-meaning scientists can return to their calling in a state of mental peace. But all this, the reader will immediately recognize, is a world apart from the real religion of the aboriginal corroboree and the Council of Trent.

Today, as always before, the mind cannot comprehend the meaning of the collision between irresistible scientific materialism and immovable religious faith. We try to cope through a step-by-step pragmatism. Our schizophrenic societies progress by knowledge but survive on inspiration derived from the very beliefs which that knowledge erodes. I suggest that the paradox can be at least intellectually resolved, not all at once but eventually and with consequences difficult to predict, if we pay due attention to the sociobiology of religion. Although the manifestations of the religious experience are resplendent and multidimensional, and so complicated that the finest of psychoanalysts and philosophers get lost in their labyrinth, I believe that religious practices can be mapped onto the two dimensions of genetic advantage and evolutionary change.

Let me moderate this statement at once by conceding that if the principles of evolutionary theory do indeed contain theology’s Rosetta stone, the translation cannot be expected to encompass in detail all religious phenomena. By traditional methods of reduction and analysis science can explain religion but cannot diminish the importance of its substance.

A historical episode will serve as a parable in the sociobiology of religion. The aboriginal people of Tasmania, like the exotic marsupial wolves that once shared their forest habitat, are extinct. It took the British colonists only forty years to finish them off (the wolves lasted another hundred years, to 1950). This abruptness is especially unfortunate from the viewpoint of anthropology, because the Tasmanians—the “wild ones”—had no chance to transmit even a description of their culture to the rest of the world. Little is known 
beyond the fact that they were hunters and gatherers of small stature with reddish-brown skin and frizzled hair, and, according to die explorers who first encountered them, an open and happy temperament. Their origin can only be guessed. Most probably they were the descendents of aboriginal Australians who reached Tasmania about ten thousand years ago, then adapted biologically and culturally to the cool, wet forests of the island. We are left with only a few photographs and skeletons. Not even the language can be reconstructed, because few Europeans who met the Tasmanians thought it worthwhile to take notes.

The British settlers who began arriving in the early 1800s regarded the Tasmanians as something less than human. They were only little brown obstacles to agriculture and civilization. Accordingly, they were rounded up during organized hunts and murdered for slight offenses. One party of men, women, and children was cut down by gunfire simply for running in the direction of whites during one of the kangaroo hunts conducted en masse by the aborigines. Most died of syphilis and other European diseases. The point of no return was reached by 1842, when the number of Tasmanians had dwindled from an original five thousand or so to fewer than thirty. The women were then too old to have any more children, and the culture had atrophied.

The last stages of the aboriginals’ decline was presided over by a remarkable altruist, George Robinson, a missionary from London. In 1830, when several hundred Tasmanians remained, Robinson began a heroic and virtually single-handed attempt to save the race. By approaching the hunted survivors sympathetically, he persuaded them to follow him out of their forest retreats into surrender. A few then settled in the new towns of the settlers, where they invariably became derelicts. The rest were taken by Robinson to a reserve on Flinders Island, an isolated post northeast of Tasmania. There they
were fed salt beef and sweet tea, dressed in European clothes, and instructed in personal hygiene, money changing, and strict Calvinism. The old culture was then completely forbidden to them.

Each day the Tasmanians went to their little church to hear a sermon by George Robinson. From this terminal phase of their cultural history we do have records, rendered in pidgin English: “One God . . . Native good, native dead, go to sky . . . Bad native dead, goes down, evil spirit, fire stops. Native cry, cry, cry . . .” The catechism repeated the easily comprehended message:


    What will God do to the world by and by?
    Burn it!

    Do you like the Devil?
    No!

    What did God make us for?
    His own purposes .. .


The Tasmanians could not survive the harsh smelting of their souls. They grew somber and lethargic and ceased producing children. Many died from influenza and pneumonia. Finally the remnants were moved to a new reserve near Hobart, on the mainland of Tasmania. The last male, known as King Billy to the Europeans, died in 1869, and the several remaining old women followed a few years later. They were the objects of intense curiosity and, finally, respect. During this period George Robinson raised a large family of his own. His life’s goal had been to try to retrieve the Tasmanians from extinction, by substituting in good conscience the more civilized form of religious subjugation for murder. Yet by the stark biological algorithm that guided him unconsciously, Robinson was not a failure.

While growing increasingly sophisticated, anthropology and history continue to support Max Weber’s conclusion that the more elementary religions seek the supernatural for purely mundane rewards: long life, abundant land and food, averting physical 
catastrophes, and the conquest of enemies. A kind of cultural Darwinism also operates during the competition among sects in the evolution of more advanced religions. Those that gain adherents grow; those that cannot, disappear. Consequently religions are like other human institutions in that they evolve in directions that enhance the welfare of the practitioners. Because this demographic benefit must accrue to the group as a whole, it can be gained partly by altruism and partly by exploitation, with certain sectors profiting at the expense of others. Alternatively, the benefit can arise as the sum of the generally increased fitnesses of all of the members. The resulting distinction in social terms is between the more oppressive and the more beneficent religions. All religions are probably oppressive to some degree, especially when they are promoted by chiefdoms and states. There is a principle in ecology, Gause’s law, which states that maximum competition is to be found between those species with identical needs. In a similar manner, the one form of altruism that religions seldom display is tolerance of other religions. Their hostility intensifies when societies clash, because religion is superbly serviceable to the purposes of warfare and economic exploitation. The conqueror's religion becomes a sword, that of the conquered a shield.

Religion constitutes the greatest challenge to human sociobiology and its most exciting opportunity to progress as a truly original theoretical discipline. If the mind is to any extent guided by Kantian imperatives, they are more likely to be found in religious feeling than in rational thought. Even if there is a materialist basis of religious process and it lies within the grasp of conventional science, it will be difficult to decipher for two reasons.

First, religion is one of the major categories of behavior undeniably unique to the human species. The principles of behavioral evolution drawn from existing population biology and experimental studies on lower animals are unlikely to apply in any direct fashion to religion.

Second, the key learning rules and their ultimate, genetic motivation are probably hidden from the conscious mind, because religion is above all the process by which individuals are persuaded to subordinate their immediate self-interest to the interests of the group. Votaries are expected to make short-term physiological sacrifices for their own long-term genetic gains. Self-deception by shamans and priests perfects their own performance and enhances the deception practiced on their constituents. In the midst of absurdity the trumpet is certain. Decisions are automatic and quick, there being no rational calculus by which groups of individuals can compute their inclusive genetic fitness on a day-to-day basis and thus know the amount of conformity and zeal that is optimum for each act. Human beings require simple rules that solve complex problems, and they tend to resist any attempt to dissect the unconscious order and resolve of their daily lives. The principle has been expressed in psychoanalytic theory by Ernest Jones as follows: “Whenever an individual considers a given (mental) process as being too obvious to permit of any investigation into its origin, and shows resistance to such an investigation, we are right in suspecting that the actual origin is concealed from him—almost certainly on account of its unacceptable nature,”

The deep structure of religious belief can be probed by examining natural selection at three successive levels. At the surface, selection is ecclesiastic: rituals and conventions are chosen by religious leaders for their emotional impact under contemporary social conditions. Ecclesiastic selection can be either dogmatic and stabilizing or evangelistic and dynamic. In either case the results are culturally transmitted; hence variations in religious practice from one society to the next are based on learning and not on genes. At the next level selection is ecological. Whatever the fidelity of ecclesiastic selection to the emotions of the faithful, however easily its favored conventions are learned, the resulting practice must eventually be tested by
the demands of the environment. If religions weaken their societies during warfare, encourage the destruction of the environment, shorten lives, or interfere with procreation they will, regardless of their short-term emotional benefits, initiate their own decline. Finally, in the midst of these complicated epicycles of cultural evolution and population fluctuation, the frequencies of genes are changing.

The hypothesis before us is that some gene frequencies are changed in consistent ways by ecclesiastic selection. Human genes, it will be recalled, program the functioning of the nervous, sensory, and hormonal systems of the body, and thereby almost certainly influence the learning process. They constrain the maturation of some behaviors and the learning rules of other behaviors. Incest taboos, taboos in general, xenophobia, the dichotomization of objects into the sacred and profane, nosism, hierarchical dominance systems, intense attention toward leaders, charisma, trophyism, and trance induction are among the elements of religious behavior most likely to be shaped by developmental programs and learning rules. All of these processes act to circumscribe a social group and bind its members together in unquestioning allegiance. Our hypothesis requires that such constraints exist, that they have a physiological basis, and that the physiological basis in turn has a genetic origin. It implies that ecclesiastical choices are influenced by the chain of events that lead from the genes through physiology to constrained learning during single lifetimes.

According to the hypothesis, the frequencies of the genes themselves are reciprocally altered by the descending sequence of several kinds of selection—ecclesiastic, ecological, and genetic—over many lifetimes. Religious practices that consistently enhance survival and procreation of the practitioners will propagate the physiological controls that favor acquisition of the practices during single lifetimes. The genes that prescribe the controls will also be favored.
Because religious practices are remote from the genes during the development of individual human beings, they may vary widely during cultural evolution. It is even possible for groups, such as the Shakers, to adopt conventions that reduce genetic fitness for as long as one or a few generations. But over many generations, the underlying genes will pay for their permissiveness by declining in the population as a whole. Other genes governing mechanisms that resist decline of fitness produced by cultural evolution will prevail, and the deviant practices will disappear. Thus culture relentlessly tests the controlling genes, but the most it can do is to replace one set of genes with another.

This hypothesis of interaction between genes and culture can be either supported or disproved if we examine the effects of religion at the ecological and genetic levels. By far the more accessible is the ecological. We need to ask: What are the effects of each religious practice on the welfare of individuals and tribes? How did the practice originate in history and under what environmental circumstances? To the extent that it represents a response to necessity or has improved the efficiency of a society over many generations, the correlation conforms to the interaction hypothesis. To the extent that it runs counter to these expectations, even if it cannot be related to reproductive fitness in a relatively simple, reasonable way, the hypothesis is in difficulty. Finally, the genetically programmed constraints on learning revealed by developmental psychology must prove to be consistent with the major trends in religious practice. If they are not, the hypothesis is doubtful, and it can be legitimately supposed that in this case cultural evolution has mimicked the theoretically predicted pattern of genetic evolution.

In order to pursue the investigation over a sufficiently wide array of topics, the definition of religious behavior must be broadened to include magic and the more sanctified tribal rituals, as well as the more elaborate beliefs constructed around mythology. I believe that
even when this step is taken, the evidence is consistent with the hypothesis of gene-culture interaction, and few episodes in the history of religion contravene it.

Consider ritual. Stirred by an early enthusiasm for Lorenz-Tin-bergen ethology, some social scientists drew an analogy between human ceremonies and the displays of animal communication. The comparison is at best imprecise. Most animal displays are discrete signals that convey limited meaning. They are commensurate with the postures, facial expressions, and elementary sounds of human nonlinguistic communication. A few animal displays, such as the most complex forms of sexual advertisement and bond formation in birds, are so impressively elaborate that they have occasionally been termed ceremonies by zoologists. But even here the comparison is misleading. Most human rituals have more than just an immediate signal value. As Durkheim stressed, they not only label but reaffirm and rejuvenate the moral values of the community.

The sacred rituals are the most distinctively human. Their elementary forms are concerned with magic, the active attempt to manipulate nature and the gods. Upper Paleolithic art from the caves of Western Europe indicates a preoccupation with game animals. There are many scenes showing spears and arrows embedded in the bodies of the prey. Other drawings depict men dancing in animal disguises or standing with heads bowed in front of animals. Probably the function was sympathetic magic, derived from the notion that what is done with an image will come to pass with the real thing. The anticipatory action is comparable to the intention movements of animals, which in the course of evolution have often been ritualized into communicative signals. The waggle dance of the honeybee is actually a miniaturized rehearsal of the flight from the hive to the food. The “straight run” performed as the middle piece of the figure-eight dance is varied precisely in direction and duration to convey the magnitude of these parameters in the true flight
to follow. Primitive man would have understood the meaning of such complex animal behavior easily. Magic was, and still is in some societies, practiced by special people variously called shamans, sorcerers, or medicine men. They alone were believed to have the secret knowledge and power to deal with the supernatural forces of nature, and as such their influence sometimes exceeded that of the tribal headmen.

As the anthropologist Roy A. Rappaport has shown in a recent critical review of the subject, sacred rites mobilize and display primitive societies in ways that appear to be directly and biologically advantageous. Ceremonies can offer information on the strength and wealth of tribes and families. Among the Maring of New Guinea, there are no chiefs or other leaders who command allegiance during war. A group gives a ritual dance, and individual men indicate their willingness to lend military support by whether they attend the dance or not. The strength of the consortium is then precisely determined by a head count. In more advanced societies military parades, embellished by the paraphernalia and rituals of the state religion, serve the same purpose. The famous potlatch ceremonies of the Northwest Coast Indians enable individuals to advertise their wealth by the amount of goods they give away. Leaders are further able to mobilize the energies of groups of kin into the manufacture of surplus goods, enlarging the power of families.

Rituals also regularize relationships in which there would otherwise be ambiguity and wasteful imprecision. The best examples of this mode of communication are rites of passage. As a boy matures his transition from child to man is very gradual in a biological and psychological sense. There will be times when he behaves as a child whereas an adult response would have been more appropriate, and vice versa. Society has difficulty in classifying him one way or the other. The rite of passage eliminates this ambiguity by arbitrarily changing the classification from a continuous gradient into a 
dichotomy. It also serves to cement the ties of the young person to the adult group that accepts him.

The proneness of the human mind to attack problems by binary classification is also manifested in witchcraft. The psychological etiology of witchcraft has been reconstructed with great skill by social scientists such as Robert A. LeVine, Keith Thomas, and Monica Wilson. The immediate motivations revealed by their studies are partly emotional and partly rational. In all societies the shaman is in a position either to heal or to cast malevolent spells. So long as his role is unchallenged, he and his kin enjoy added power. If his actions are not only benevolent but also sanctioned through ritual, they contribute to the resolve and integration of the society. The biological advantages of institutionalized witchcraft therefore seem clear.

The witchhunt, the obverse of sorcery’s practice, is a much more puzzling phenomenon and provides a truly interesting challenge to our theoretical investigation. Why do people from time to time declare themselves bewitched, or their society afflicted, and search for malevolent supernatural powers in their neighbors? Exorcisms and inquisitions are phenomena as complex and powerful as the practice of magic, but even here motivations prove to be rooted in the self-seeking of individuals. The epidemic of witchhunting in Tudor and Stuart England is one of the better documented examples. Before this period (1560-1680) the Catholic Church had offered the citizenry a well-organized system of ritual precautions against evil spirits and malevolent spells. The Church had, in effect, practiced positive witchcraft. The Reformation removed this psychological protection. Protestant ministers denounced the old religious practices while reaffirming the existence of evil magic. Deprived of ritual countermeasures, bewitched persons turned to the suspected witches themselves, accused them publicly, and sought their destruction.

A close examination of the court records has revealed the probable deeper motivation behind the persecutions. Typically the accuser
had turned down a poor woman who asked for food or some other favor and was then struck by a personal misfortune such as a crop failure or death in the family. By fastening the blame on the woman the accuser accomplished two purposes. He took direct action against what he sincerely believed to be the cause of his troubles, in obedience to a certain logic that recognized the apartness and meddlesome behavior of alleged witches. The second motivation is more subtle and less easily proved. According to Thomas,



> The conflict between resentment and a sense of obligation produced the ambivalence which made it possible for men to rum begging women brusquely from the door and yet to suffer torment of conscience after having done so. The ensuing guilt was fertile ground for witchcraft accusations, since subsequent misfortune could be seen as retaliation on the part of the witch. The tensions that produced witchcraft allegations were those generated by a society which no longer held a clear view as to how its dependent members should be treated; they reflected the ethical conflict between the twin and opposing doctrines that those who did not work should not eat, and that it was blessed for the rich to support the poor.



So by transmuting the dilemma into a war against evil spirits, the accuser rationalized the more selfish course of action.

Among the Nyansongan of Kenya, witches are identified through gossip rather than by formal denunciation. The Nyansongan leaders, including the homestead heads, elders, chiefs, and members of the tribunal courts, usually reject the stories of witchcraft and attempt to resolve the disputes by discussion and arbitration. The looseness of the procedure permits individuals to peddle rumors and accusations as a means of calling attention to their personal problems.

The practical nature of witchcraft and other forms of magic is the
reason such activities are often distinguished from the higher strata of “true” religion. Most scholars have followed Durkheim in making a fundamental distinction between the sacred, the core of religion, and the profane, the quality invested in magic and ordinary life. To sanctify a procedure or a statement is to certify it as beyond question and imply punishment for anyone who dares to contradict it. In the Hindu creation myths, for example, those who many outside their caste go to the hellish Yama’s kingdom after death, where they are forced to embrace red-hot human forms. So removed is the sacred from the profane that simply to speak of it in the wrong circumstances is a transgression. The sacred rites engender awe, an intimation of qualities beyond human understanding. This extreme form of certification is granted to the practices and dogmas that serve the vital interests of the group. The individual is prepared by the sacred rituals for supreme effort and self-sacrifice. Overwhelmed by shibboleths, special costumes, and sacred dancing and music accurately keyed to his emotive centers, he is transformed by a religious experience. The votary is ready to reassert allegiance to his tribe and family, perform charities, consecrate his life, leave for the hunt, join the battle, die for God and country. It was true in the past, as John Pfeiffer has said:

> Everything they knew and believed, the full force of ancestral authority and tradition, came to a growing white-heat focus in ceremony. What began with a shaman performing in a trance among people around camp fires culminated in spectacles conducted by high priests and their cohorts from platforms elevated above the multitude. There was singing and chanting, words said over and over again, recited in singsong metrical patterns with punctuating rhymes at the ends of lines. Music, setting the pace in the background and echoing and rising to crescendos and climaxes, reinforced the beat. Dancers with
masks kept time to the words and the music as they acted out the roles of gods and heroes. Spectators moved with the rhythms and chanted ritual responses.

And so it continues to the present time, in usually more fragmented and muted versions. The modem traditionalist heresy of Catholicism and the evangelistic and revitalization movements of the Protestants are efforts to reverse the corroding secularization of society and to return to the old forms. An unthinking submission to the communal will remains among the most emotionally potent virtues among “good” people in the mainstream of the society. “Jesus is the answer” is the contemporary equivalent of Dens vult, the rallying cry of the First Crusade. God wills it, whatever the action, however hard the path. Mao Tse-tung said “We must persevere and work unceasingly, and we, too, will touch God’s heart. Our God is none other than the Chinese people.” When the gods are served, the Darwinian fitness of the members of the tribe is the ultimate if unrecognized beneficiary. We must now inquire: Is the readiness to be indoctrinated a neurologically based learning rule that evolved through the selection of clans competing one against the other?

In support of this simple biological hypothesis is the fact that the blinding force of religious allegiance can operate in the absence of theology. The May Day rallies of T'ien An Men Square would have been instantly understood by the Mayan multitudes, Lenin’s tomb by the worshipers of Christ’s bloodied shroud. Consider the following reflection by Grigori Pyatakov, one of Lenin’s closest disciples: “A real Communist, that is, a man raised in the Party and who has absorbed its spirit becomes himself in a way a miracle man. For such a Party a true Bolshevik will readily cast out from his mind ideas in which he has believed for years. A true Bolshevik has submerged his personality in the collectivity, the ‘Party,’ to such an extent that he can make the necessary effort to break away from his own opinions
and convictions, and can honestly agree with the Party—that is the test of a true Bolshevik.”

In The Denial of Death, Ernest Becker reminds us that the guru phenomenon is a device for surrendering the self to a powerful and benevolent force. The Zen master demands absolute allegiance in every technique—the exact headstand, the exact manner of breathing—until the apprentice is drawn from the self and sustained by a magical power. The Zen archer no longer shoots the arrow; the interior of nature breaks into the world through the archer’s perfect selflessness and releases the string.

The self-fulfilling cults of the present day, including Esalen, est, Arica, and Scientology, are the vulgar replacements of the traditional forms. Their leaders receive a degree of obedience from otherwise intelligent Americans that would wring smiles of admiration from the most fanatical Sufi shaykh. In the Erhard Training Seminars (est), novitiates are pounded from the lectern with simplistic truths from the behavioral sciences and Eastern philosophy while being simultaneously bullied and soothed by attendants. They are not allowed to leave their seats to eat or go to the bathroom or even to stand and stretch. The reward, according to Peter Marin’s personal study, is the masochistic relief that results from placing oneself into the hands of a master to whom omnipotence has been granted.

Advantage can accrue to both the individual and the society from such willing subordination. It was Henri Bergson who first recognized what might be the ultimate agent behind the mechanisms of emotional gratification. The extreme plasticity of human social behavior, Bergson noted, is both a great strength and a danger. If each family worked out its own rules of behavior, the society as a whole would disintegrate into chaos. To counteract selfish behavior and the dissolving power of high intelligence and idiosyncracy, each society must codify itself. Within broad limits any set of conventions
works better than none at all. Because arbitrary codes work, organizations tend to be inefficient and marred by unnecessary inequities. As Rappaport has succinctly expressed it: “Sanctification transforms the arbitrary into the necessary, and regulatory mechanisms which are arbitrary are likely to be sanctified.”

But the arbitrariness of sanctification engenders criticism, and within the more liberal and self-conscious societies visionaries and revolutionaries set out to change the system. Their ultimate purpose is to elevate codes of their own devising. Reform meets repression, because to the extent that the reigning code has been sanctified and mythologized, the majority of the people regard it as beyond question, and disagreement is defined as blasphemy.

The stage is thus set for the conflict of natural selection at the individual and group levels. In addressing this conflict we have come full circle to the theoretical question of the origin of altruism. Grant for the moment that there is a generic predisposition to conformity and consecration. Was it installed by selection at the level of entire societies or by selection at the level of the individual? The question can be rephrased at the level of psychology: Is the behavior hardcore, programmed to safeguard the interests of the entire community, or is it soft-core and thereby prone to manipulation in the self-interest of individuals?

At one extreme, the one more likely to produce hard religiosity, the group is the unit of selection. When conformity becomes too weak, groups suffer decline and perhaps even extinction. In this hypothetical version it is still possible for selfish, individualistic members to gain the upper hand and to multiply at the expense of others. But the rising influence of their deviant predispositions accelerates the vulnerability of the society and hastens its decline. Societies with higher frequencies of such individuals, and hence of the genes that predispose to them, will give way to those less weakened in “genetic resolve,” and the overall frequency of conforming
individuals in the population as a whole will rise. The genetic capacity for blind conformity spreads at the expense of the genetic incapacity. Even the potential for self-sacrifice can be strengthened in this manner, because the willingness of individuals to relinquish rewards or even surrender their own lives will favor group survival. The loss of genes suffered through the deaths of disciplined individuals can be more than balanced by a gain of genes attained through expansion of the benefited group.

At the other extreme, generating a softer and more ambivalent religiosity, individual selection is the ruling force in Darwinian evolution. The ability of individuals to conform permits them to enjoy the benefits of membership with a minimum of energy expenditure and risk, and their behavior is sustained over long periods of time as the social norm. Although the rivals of the conformists in the society may gain a momentary advantage through selfishness and irreverence, it is lost in the long run through ostracism and repression. The conformists perform altruistic acts possibly to the extent of risking their own lives not because of a genetic predisposition selected through competition among entire societies, but because the group is occasionally able to take advantage of the indoctrinability which on other occasions is favorable to the individual.

These two possibilities need not be mutually exclusive; group and individual selection can be reinforcing. If success of the group requires spartan virtues and self-denying religiosity, victory can more than recompense the surviving faithful in land, power, and the opportunity to reproduce. The average individual will win this Darwinian game, and his gamble will be profitable, because the summed efforts of the participants give the average member a more than compensatory edge:



> The LORD spoke to Moses and said, “Count all that has been captured, man or beast, you and Eleazar die priest and the heads
of families in the community, and divide it equally between the fighting men who went on the campaign and the whole community. You shall levy a tax for the LORD: from the combatants it shall be one out of every five hundred, whether men, cattle, asses, or sheep, to be taken out of their share and given to Eleazar the priest as a contribution for the LORD. Out of the share of the Israelites it shall be one out of every fifty taken, whether man or beast, cattle, asses, or sheep, to be given to the Levites who are in charge of the LORD's tabernacle. (Num. 30:25-38)



The highest forms of religious practice, when examined more closely, can be seen to confer biological advantage. Above all they congeal identity. In the midst of the chaotic and potentially disorienting experiences each person undergoes daily, religion classifies him, provides him with unquestioned membership in a group claiming great powers, and by this means gives him a driving purpose in life compatible with his self-interest. His strength is the strength of the group, his guide the sacred covenant. The theologian and sociologist Hans J. Mol has aptly termed this key process the “sacralization of identity.” The mind is predisposed—one can speculate that learning rules are physiologically programmed—to participate in a few processes of sacralization which in combination generate the institutions of organized religion.

The first mechanism is objectification, the description of reality with images and definitions that are easily understood and invulnerable to contradictions and exceptions. Heaven and hell, human life as an arena for the struggle between the forces of good and evil, gods controlling each force of nature, and spirits ready to enforce the taboos are examples of this device. Objectification creates an attractive framework on which to festoon symbols and myths.

Commitment is the second process of religion-making. The 
faithful consecrate their lives to the ideas that have been objectified and to the welfare of those who do the same. Commitment is pure tribalism enacted through emotional self-surrender. Its focus is on the mystic covenant and the shamans and priests whose translation of the codes is deemed necessary for certification. Commitment is attained by ceremonies, in which the arbitrary rules and sacred objects are consecrated and repetitively defined until they seem as much a part of human nature as love or hunger.

Finally there is myth: the narratives by which the tribe’s special place in the world is explained in rational terms consistent with the listener’s understanding of the physical world. Preliterate hunter-gatherers tell believable sacred stories about the creation of the world. Human beings and animals with supernatural powers and a special relationship to the tribe fight, eat, and beget offspring. Their actions explain a little bit of how nature works and why the tribe has a favored position on earth. The complexity of the myths increases with that of societies. They duplicate the essential structure in more fantastic forms. Tribes of demigods and heroes, warring for king-ship and possession of territory, allocate dominion over different parts of the lives of mortal men. Over and again the myths strike the Manichaean theme of two supernal forces struggling for control of the world of man. For some of the Amerinds of the Amazon-Orinoco forests, for example, the contenders are two brothers representing the sun and the moon, one a benevolent creator, the other a trickster. In the later Hindu myths Brahma, benevolent lord of the universe, creates Night. She gives birth to the rakshasas, who try to eat Brahma and to destroy mortal men. Another recurrent theme in the more elaborate mythologies is the apocalypse and millenium, wherein it is forecast that the struggles will cease when a god descends to end the existing world and to create a new order.

Belief in such high gods is not universal. Among eighty-one hunter-gatherer societies surveyed by John W. M. Whiting, only 
twenty-eight, or 35 percent, included high gods in their sacred traditions. The concept of an active, moral God who created the world is even less widespread. Furthermore, this concept most commonly arises with a pastoral way of life. The greater the dependence on herding, the more likely the belief in a shepherd god of the Judeo-Christian type. In other kinds of society the belief occurs in 10 percent or less of those whose religion is known.

The God of monotheistic religions is always male; this strong patriarchal tendency has several cultural sources. Pastoral societies arc highly mobile, tightly organized, and often militant, all features that dp the balance toward male authority. It is also significant that herding, the main economic base, is primarily the responsibility of men. Because the Hebrews were originally a herding people, the Bible describes God as a shepherd and the chosen people as his sheep. Islam, one of the strictest of all monotheistic faiths, grew to early power among the herding people of the Arabian peninsula.

The sociobiological explanation of faith in God leads to the crux of the role of mythology in modem life. It is obvious that human beings are still largely ruled by myth. Furthermore, much of contemporary intellectual and political strife is due to the conflict between three great mythologies: Marxism, traditional religion, and scientific materialism. Marxism is still regarded by purists as a form of scientific materialism, but it is not. The perception of history as an inevitable class struggle proceeding to the emergence of a lightly governed egalitarian society with production in control of the workers is supposed to be based on an understanding of the subterranean forces of pure economic process. In fact, it is equally based on an inaccurate interpretation of human nature. Marx, Engels, and all the disciples and deviationists after them, however sophisticated, have operated on a set of larger hidden premises about the deeper desires of human beings and the extent to which human behavior can be
molded by social environments. These premises have never been tested. To the extent that they can be made explicit, they are inadequate or simply wrong. They have become the hidden wards of the historicist dogma they were supposed to generate.

Marxism is sociobiology without biology. The strongest opposition to the scientific study of human nature has come from a small number of Marxist biologists and anthropologists who are committed to the view that human behavior arises from a very few unstructured drives. They believe that nothing exists in the untrained human mind that cannot be readily channeled to the purposes of the revolutionary socialist state. When faced with the evidence of greater structure, their response has been to declare human nature off limits to further scientific investigation. A few otherwise very able scholars have gone so far as to suggest that merely to talk about the subject is dangerous, at least to their concept of progress. I hope that I have been able to show that this perception is profoundly wrong. At the same time, anxiety about the health of Marxism as a theory and a belief system is justified. Although Marxism was formulated as the enemy of ignorance and superstition, to the extent that it has become dogmatic it has faltered in that commitment and is now mortally threatened by the discoveries of human sociobiology

But if Marxism is only an inaccurate product of scientific materialism, a failed satrap so to speak, traditional religion is not. As science proceeds to dismantle the ancient mythic stories one by one, theology retreats to the final redoubt from which it can never be driven. This is the idea of Cod in the creation myth: God as will, the cause of existence, and the agent who generated all of the energy in the original fireball and set the natural laws by which the universe evolved. So long as the redoubt exists, theology can slip out through its portals and make occasional sallies back into the real world.
Whenever other philosophers let their guard down, deists can, in the manner of process theology, postulate a pervasive transcendental will. They can even hypothesize miracles.

But make no mistake about the power of scientific materialism. It presents the human mind with an alternative mythology that until now has always, point for point in zones of conflict, defeated traditional religion. Its narrative form is the epic: the evolution of the universe from the big bang of fifteen billion years ago through the origin of the elements and celestial bodies to the beginnings of life on earth. The evolutionary epic is mythology in the sense that the laws it adduces here and now are believed but can never be definitely proved to form a cause-and-eftect continuum from physics to the social sciences, from this world to all other worlds in the visible universe, and backward through time to the beginning of the universe. Every part of existence is considered to be obedient to physical laws requiring no external control. The scientist’s devotion to parsimony in explanation excludes the divine spirit and other extraneous agents. Most importantly, we have come to the crucial stage in the history of biology when religion itself is subject to the explanations of the natural sciences. As I have tried to show, sociobiology can account for the very origin of mythology by the principle of natural selection acting on the genetically evolving material structure of the human brain.

If this interpretation is correct, the final decisive edge enjoyed by scientific naturalism will come from its capacity to explain traditional religion, its chief competitor, as a wholly material phenomenon. Theology is not likely to survive as an independent intellectual discipline. But religion itself will endure for a long time as a vital force in society. Like the mythical giant Antaeus who drew energy from his mother, the earth, religion cannot be defeated by those who merely cast it down. The spiritual weakness of scientific naturalism is due to the fact that it has no such primal source of power. While
explaining the biological sources of religious emotional strength, it is unable in its present form to draw on them, because the evolutionary epic denies immortality to the individual and divine privilege to the society, and it suggests only an existential meaning for the human species. Humanists will never enjoy the hot pleasures of spiritual conversion and self-surrender; scientists cannot in all honesty serve as priests. So the time has come to ask: Does a way exist to divert the power of religion into the services of the great new enterprise that lays bare the sources of that power? We have come back at last to the second dilemma in a form that demands an answer.

