---
title: Freedom in Sartre
book:
    title: A Guide to Philosophy
    author: Witold Gombrowicz
category: philosophy
permalink: /books/a_guide_to_philosophy/09_Freedom_in_Sartre.html
date: 2014-04-13 01:19:00 +0800
layout: book_page 
---

*Tuesday, May 6,1969*
{: .text-right}

Freedom in Sartre
==================

####Freedom is an experience.####

####It is linked to future time, which is the time of human existence.####

####It is marked by finality, which is the opposite of *causality.* In the world of *causality,* one does something because one is obliged by a cause to do so. In the world of finality, one does something for something. I pick up the pipe in order to smoke. Freedom is always achieved in a *situation,* that is, that in each situation I have a freedom of choice, but I cannot choose something which is outside of the situation. For example, I can walk or sit, but I cannot fly.####

####Finally, it is freedom which is the foundation of all value. We must not forget that atheism is at the root of all Sartrean existentialism. He said that it is not as easy to follow atheism through to the end as he did. When one is there, at the limit, one sees that, since God does not exist, all qualities are established by me, by my freedom. I can, for example, establish torture as the supreme good: the moral and the immoral are two things which are decided in complete freedom. But as in all of Sartre’s work, we immediately notice a retreat. One would think that he is the most absolute immoralist, but no. He is 100 percent moralist. If I understand this aspect of Sartrean philosophy correctly, it is rather artificial.####

####1. Man in his freedom chooses himself by choosing his *values* (replace quality by value). This depends on his free choice. But on my choice depends what Heidegger called authentic existence and consequently, real life or a different world.####

####2. Consequently, man is responsible for his self, but man is responsible also for the world, since *to choose oneself *means to choose the world. Therefore I can choose myself as Hitlerite, Nazi, and choose a Nazi world.####

####Sartre was asked: why cannot we choose Hitlerism if we are the free creator of our values, and what obliges me, for example to choose Marxism?####

####This rather elementary contradiction was not, according to my humble opinion, sufficiently clarified by Sartre, because evidently morality is a limitation of freedom, even if reasons are needed for choosing that limitation.####

####Here on the subject of freedom, Sartre is very categorical. He says that the choice depends only on us, there are no pre-established values, it is our choice which creates them. One could imagine that man, with all his freedom, is nevertheless condemned to satisfy the fundamental necessities of life, such as eating. But this also depends on me. If I choose suicide, food loses all value for me. And from this absolute responsibility of man to himself is born the characteristic anguish of existentialism, as much for Heidegger as for Kierkegaard and Sartre.####

####This anguish is the anguish of nothingness. When I am afraid, says Heidegger, I am afraid of something, such as a tiger. But if I do not fear anything specific, that is anguish. This anguish is born, according to Sartre, from our responsibility regarding our existence. One could ask, for instance, how can I be absolutely free to choose myself, if, born short, I want to be tall? Now the choice is not the choice of a fact, it is the choice of a value. I cannot freely choose my height, but that depends on my considering smallness as a quality or a defect.####

There are still other impossibilities for our freedom, deriving from what one calls man’s *facticity. *We must not forget that man by his body, by his mechanism, belongs to the world dictated by causality, since if we are stabbed, evidently we are going to bleed, like every other animal. Freedom manifests itself only in existence, in that specific being which is the Being for itself.

Anguish is anguish before myself, such that I am not yet, since I must choose myself. It comes from the consciousness of freedom and it is the fundamental structure of man. Most people do not feel it, because they flee from these problems and in fleeing it they affirm it.

Sartre defines this as an act of *bad faith,* which is, according to him, an act by which we want to deceive (distort) ourselves, to lie to ourselves, and these people reject will, but this act of rejection is also free, and they know it. From there, the reassuring myth which lets us forget our terrible solitude, and our responsibility to ourselves. Sartre calls that man who hides from this responsibility a “bastard.”

There is a famous short story by Sartre, *L’En**fance dun chef,* in which a young man, panicked in the face of his homosexual tendencies, in order not to choose to be homosexual, chooses to be anti-Semitic, and he becomes anti-Semitic for everyone. This is his characteristic, his duty, etc. In fleeing from our fundamental responsibility, we choose to be another character, or we choose absolute values such as God, the laws of nature, etc. So now, Sartre defines what his own morality consists of.

####It is choosing freedom and affirming freedom.####

####This is the basis of Sartre’s communism. One could wonder why Sartre, in choosing communism, a system defined by values, is not a bastard. It is that every other social system signifies the exploitation of man by man, thus a limitation on freedom. In choosing communism, we choose freedom.####

