---
title: Existentialism
book:
    title: A Guide to Philosophy
    author: Witold Gombrowicz
category: philosophy
permalink: /books/a_guide_to_philosophy/08_Existentialism.html
date: 2014-04-13 01:17:00 +0800
layout: book_page 
---

*Monday, May 5,1969*
{: .text-right}

Existentialism
===============

####Existentialism is subjectivity.####

####Personally, I am quite subjective and it seems to me that this attitude corresponds to reality.####

####*Subjective* man####

####*Concrete* man.####

####Not a concept of man, but Pierre or Francois, since the concept of man does not exist, says Kierkegaard.####

####Because of this, it is monstrously difficult for existentialism to make arguments, since arguments are based on concepts, and only thanks to Heidegger’s betrayal which took hold of the phenomenological method, can one speak *[sentence incomplete*].####

####The existentialist is a *subjective, free* man. He has what one calls free will, unlike a man viewed from the scientific outside, who is always subject to causality, like a mechanism.####

####This bold theory that man is free seems absolutely mad in a world where everything is cause and effect. It relies on an elementary sensation: we are free and there is no way to convince me that if I move my left hand it is not because I want to. It is not easy to specify what this possibility of freedom is based on.####

I imagine that it is based on a difference in time. Time for man is not the past but the future. If one does something, it is not *because of* but rather *in order to.* “I read in order to remind myself,” etc.

If in the past, you have causality, in the future, in man’s existence, we are dealing with the future.

One can say, more profoundly, that in our consciousness one finds the same internal rupture, which reveals itself, for example, in the physical.

Man, that being *for himself,* is divided in two (with a hole). It is in this nothingness, in this void (the hole), that the concept of *freedom* is introduced. Freedom has an enormous role for Sartre, because it is the foundation of his moral system.

Sartre is a moralist, and it is curious that the same deviation observed by Husserl in Descartes is produced again in French philosophy.

Descartes, in an extremely categorical way, reduces thought to a single description of consciousness, but suddenly, *frightened* by the annihilation of God, of the world, he betrays himself. He recognized God’s existence. This already deduces, from the existence of God, the existence of the world.

Now, in Sartre, in my view, we are dealing with the same cowardice. There are perhaps fifteen pages in *Being and Nothingness* where Sartre makes some dramatic efforts to logically justify a phenomenon which seems absolutely evident, the existence of a man other than “self.” For example, the phenomenon of Witold’s existence is the same as that of a chair.

Sartre analyzes all the systems: Kant, Hegel, Husserl, and he demonstrates that none of them has any possibility of recognizing the other man. Why? Because to be man is to be subject. It is to have a consciousness which recognizes everything else as object. If I admitted that Witold too has a consciousness, then inevitably I myself am an object for Witold, who is the subject. It is impossible to be subject and object at the same time. Here Sartre was frightened. His highly developed ethics refuses to admit that there is no other man because there are no longer any moral obligations. The other being object.

Sartre, who was always torn between Marxism (scientific) and existentialism (the opposite), was frightened just like Descartes. He stated quite simply and honestly that even though it was impossible to recognize the existence of others, there is no other way than to recognize it as an obvious fact. There all of Sartre’s philosophy, all its creative potential, dramatically collapses, and this man, gifted with extraordinary genius, becomes a sad fellow (Marxism-existentialism) who, essentially, is obliged to produce a philosophy of concessions. His thinking became a compromise between Marxism and existentialism. And so all his books became the basis of a moral system in which everything already serves to support a preconceived theory. Now the basis of this moral system is the well-known *Sartrean freedom.*

He says, “I am free, I feel free. Therefore I always have the possibility to choose. This choice is limited because man is always in a situation, and he can choose only within that situation. Example: I can stay on the bed or I can walk, but I cannot choose to fly because I do not have wings. There is free choice for which man is responsible. If I refuse to choose between two possibilities, this is also a way of choosing a third position. If one does not want to choose between communism and anti-communism, there is neutrality.” Sartre also says that man is the creator of values. This is the direct consequence of a

stubborn atheism, the most consistent in all of philosophy.

Such is the situation: since we have lost the notion of God, so we ourselves become *creators of values,* because of our absolute freedom. And, in this sense, we can do what we want. Example: I can, if it is my choice, find it a good idea to assassinate X or not to assassinate him. The two possibilities exist, but in choosing them, I choose myself as assassin, or not.

Here I believe I recognize an excess of intellectualism and decadence (the weakening) of sensitivity in philosophy. Philosophers, except Schopenhauer, seem to be people comfortably seated in their easy chairs who treat pain with absolutely Olympian disdain, which will vanish the day they go to the dentist and cry *ouch, ouch, Doctor.* Sartre, in his theoretical disdain for pain, states that for a man who chooses pain as good, torture can become a celestial pleasure. This assertion seems very doubtful to me and characteristic of the French bourgeoisie, which, very fortunately, was spared for a long time from great pain. Despite Sartre’s assertion that freedom is limited by the situation and what is called “facticity” (the fact, for example, that we have a body, that we

are a fact, a phenomenon, in the world), despite all his limitations, he goes too far.

Existential man is

*concrete,*

*alone,*

*made of nothingness,*

*thus free.*

He is condemned to freedom and he can *choose *himself.

What happens if we choose, for example, frivolity and not authenticity, falseness and not truth? As there is no hell, there is no punishment. From the existential point of view, the only punishment is that this man has no true existence. Therefore he is not an extant thing. Here is a play on words, as much from Heidegger as from Sartre, which the one who chose the supposed non-existence will really make fun of.

What is the future of existentialism?

Very great.

I do not agree with the superficial judgments for which existentialism is a trend. Existentialism is a consequence of a basic fact of the internal rupture of consciousness which is manifested not only in man’s inherent qualities, but—extremely curious fact—is evident in physics for example, where you have two ways of perceiving reality:

####—corpuscular —undulatory Example: theories of light.####

Now, both theories are right, as experience demonstrates, but they are contradictory. You have the same phenomenon in the physics concept concerning electrons, where there are two different ways of seeing them, both of which are correct and contradictory. Now, in my view, man is divided between the subjective and the objective, irreparably and for all time. This is a kind of wound we have which is impossible to heal, and of which we are more and more conscious. In a number of years, it will be even “bloodier,” since it can only grow with the evolution of consciousness.

The profound truth of Hegel’s dialectics (thesis-synthesis) appears here. It is impossible, under these conditions, to ask that a man be harmonious, that he be able to resolve anything. Fundamental impotence. No solution at all.

In the light of these thoughts, literature which considers that we can organize the world is the most idiotic thing imaginable.

####A sad writer who thinks himself master of reality is a ridiculous thing. Hah! Hah! Hah! Phew!####
